P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               103


                     COACHING CUE

          A great insight into journal keeping is oﬀered by Charles Kirk (www.
          thekirkreport.com) in Chapter 9, who enters his observations into a database
          program so that he can readily retrieve journal entries on various topics. This
          is an eﬀective way of monitoring speciﬁc trading challenges over time.




          LESSON 32: RECOGNIZE
          YOUR PATTERNS

          One of the keys to brief therapy is the creation of a concrete focus for
          change. One of the reasons that older forms of therapy took so long to
          implement—including years of psychoanalysis—was that they attempted
          broad personality changes. Our understanding of personality traits and
          their biological, hereditary components helps us to be a bit more modest in
          our aims. No form of coaching or counseling will restructure a person’s per-
          sonality; nor should it. The goal of coaching is to help people work around
          their weaknesses and build their strengths, so that they can express
          their basic personalities and skills as constructively and successfully as
          possible.

              You cannot change your personality, but you can change how it is
              expressed.

               Many self-described coaches lack formal training in psychology and es-
          pecially lack the experience and grounding of licensed helping profession-
          als. They acquire a cluster of self-help methods and try to fit all problems
          to those. The result is a canned set of solutions for any given problem. This
          can be disastrous. The patterns that interfere with trading often lie well out-
          side canned, self-help nostrums. One successful trader I recently met at a
          conference presentation was having a poor trading year and was even con-
          sidering retiring. She complained of a loss of enthusiasm and excitement
          about her trading, as well as weight gain and more negative feelings about
          herself. She had seen three prior coaches and therapists, all to no avail.
          After a short discussion, I obtained enough information to suggest that she
          obtain a blood workup from her primary care physician. She did so, and the
          results suggested a low level of thyroid activity. Once she received proper
          hormonal supplementation, her mood and energy level returned, her
          concentration improved, and she resumed her successful career.
               How many traders lose their careers because they never understand
          the patterns that underlie their problems?
