P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          244                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 76: TRACK THE
          CORRELATIONS OF YOUR RETURNS

          A department store is an example of a diversified business. The store sells
          a variety of goods, so it attracts a wide range of customers. If consumers
          aren’t buying seasonal items, they may come in to shop for clothes or
          housewares. The departments that offer products for children, teens, men,
          and women ensure that there will be a mix among customers, evening out
          peaks and valleys in traffic patterns for any of these individual groups.
               In your trading business, diversification provides you with multiple
          profit centers. You can make money from intraday stock index trades and
          longer-term moves in the bond market, for example. If you divide your capi-
          tal among different ideas and strategies, you smooth out your equity curve,
          much as the presence of many departments keeps traffic flowing to the
          department store. When any one or two strategies fail to produce good re-
          turns, others contribute to the bottom line.


              Diversification in your trading enables you to stay afloat when
              any one of your strategies stops working for a while or becomes
              obsolete.

              But how do you know your trading business is truly diversified? Just
          because you are trading different setups or markets doesn’t mean that
          you necessarily possess a diversified portfolio. The only way you can en-
          sure true diversification is by tracking the correlations among the returns
          of your different strategies.
              Suppose you are a day trader who trades two basic patterns: moves
          on earnings news and breakouts from trading ranges. The idea is that your
          returns would be diversified because you would be long some names (earn-
          ings surprises and breakouts to the upside) and short others (earnings
          surprises and breakouts to the downside). You would also be diversified
          across market sectors and perhaps even by the time frame of your hold-
          ings. If you follow the logic of the previous lesson, you can track perfor-
          mance metrics for your earnings-related trades and your breakout trades.
          You can also track performance across your long trades and your shorts.
              When you track the correlation of your returns, you take the analysis a
          step further. You calculate the daily P/L for each of your strategies over a
          period of time. You then evaluate the correlation between the two number
          series. If the strategies are truly independent, they should not be highly cor-
          related. A slow market, for example, may yield little in the way of breakout
          trades, but you could still make money on selected stocks with earnings
          surprises. Similarly, you may get little earnings news on a particular day,
