P1: JYS
intro   JWBT039-Steenbarger      November 24, 2008      21:25    Printer: Yet to come




                              Introduction


                oo few of us are play-actors of our own ideals. We have strengths and

         T      talents, dreams and aspirations. But when we look hour-by-hour, day-
                by-day, not many of these ideals are concretely expressed. The days
         become months, then years, and—at some sad juncture—we look back on
         life and wonder where it went.
              That could be you: the middle-age person looking back on how “I
         could’ve been a contender.” Or, you could live a different life script. You
         could become the actor of your ideals and live their realization.
              If you’re thinking this is a strange introduction to a trading text, you’re
         right. This book doesn’t start with supply and demand, trading patterns, or
         money management. It begins with you and what you want from your life.
         Trading, in this context, is more than buying, selling, and hedging: it is a
         vehicle for self-mastery and development.
              Every trader, whether he consciously identifies it or not, is an en-
         trepreneur. Traders open their business and compete in a marketplace.
         They identify and pursue opportunity, even as they preserve their capi-
         tal. Traders refine and expand their craft; they take calculated risks. As
         entrepreneurs, traders start with the premise that they bring value to the
         marketplace. Amid the inevitable disappointments and setbacks, the long
         hours and the limited resources, the risk and uncertainty, it can be difficult
         to sustain that optimism. It is so much easier than to keep one’s visions on
         a shelf and forego the daily efforts of enacting ideals.
              Some traders, however, cannot shelve their aspirations. Like the moth,
         they’ll pursue distant lights even if it means an occasional singe. To those
         noble souls, I dedicate this book.
              When I work with traders and portfolio managers at hedge funds, pro-
         prietary trading firms, and investment banks, I don’t tell them how to trade.
         Most of them trade strategies different from my own and know far more
         about their markets than I ever will. Rather, I figure out their strengths. I
         learn what these traders and managers do well and how they do it, and I
         help them build a career out of what they’re already good at. Just as fish
         cannot comprehend water, being immersed in it from birth, we typically


                                                                                        1
