P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                    207


                      COACHING CUE

          What is meaningful for you as a tangible reward for your self-coaching progress?
          A vacation with loved ones? A new car? One trader I work with donates a portion
          of his proﬁts to a charity he deeply believes in; helping them out inspires his own
          eﬀorts. It helps to reinforce the small steps of progress via shaping, but it also
          helps to have a larger goal that you’re working toward; a goal that is meaningful
          for you. Remind yourself periodically of the goal; track your progress toward the
          goal. The psychologist Abraham Maslow recognized clearly: we perform at our
          best when we are impelled toward positive goals, not driven by deﬁcits and
          unmet needs.




          LESSON 65: THE CONDITIONING
          OF MARKETS

          A large part of money management follows from a deep appreciation of
          fat tails. Market returns are not normally distributed; they show a higher
          proportion of extreme occurrences than you would expect from a simple
          flipping of coins. This is true across all time frames. The odds of a multiple
          standard deviation move against you (or for you) are sufficiently high that,
          if you’re in the market frequently over a long period of time, you will surely
          encounter those periods in which markets stay irrational longer than you
          can stay solvent.
               The distribution of market returns is also leptokurtic: it is far more
          peaked around the median than a normal distribution. This implies that
          market moves revert to a mean more often than we would normally ex-
          pect by chance. Just as a market seems to be moving in one direction—
          trending—it reverses course and finishes little changed.
               It is difficult to imagine a situation better designed to create frustra-
          tion. Markets produce large moves more often than would be expected if
          returns were distributed normally, which leads traders to seek large, trend-
          ing moves. But markets also revert to mean returns more often than we
          would expect in normal distributions, creating many false trends. If you
          trade a countertrend strategy, you run the risk of being blown out by a
          multiple standard deviation move. If you try to jump aboard trends, you’ll
          find yourself chopped to pieces during false breakouts.


              The very structure of market returns ensures a high degree of psy-
              chological challenge for traders.
