P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          284                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Learning to Be Wrong
              “Most beginning traders have a tremendous need to be right and are
              resistant to admitting they might be wrong,” Dave observes. “I learned
              quickly that being right (that is, having a high win rate) doesn’t cor-
              relate well with making money. Win rate is overrated—in fact, one of
              the most profitable strategies I’ve traded had a winning percentage be-
              low 30 percent.” Dave is right: most good traders I’ve worked with are
              not far from a win rate of 50 percent. Their success comes from know-
              ing when they’re right—and taking full advantage—and knowing when
              they’re wrong—and minimizing losses. Overcoming the psychological
              need to be right is essential to success; without that, it’s too easy to
              take profits early and remain stubborn in losing trades.

              Automate
              Dave recounts, “I’ve spent my trading career trying to remove as much
              of my discretion as possible from my trading. Many aspects of manual
              trading systems can be automated. The benefits of automation are nu-
              merous: more consistency, less time spent doing trading grunt work,
              and fewer mistakes. I’ve found that the more automation I have in my
              systems, the better my results. This includes my manual trading sys-
              tems all the way to 100 percent completely automated trading systems
              that I trade.” His point is well taken: even with discretionary trading,
              execution can be automated so that decisions can remain strictly rule-
              governed. The simple step of trading with limit orders rather than at the
              market can make a meaningful difference in performance over time, as
              traders enter and exit trades at favorable levels, rather than chase mar-
              kets and get themselves in and out at the worst possible times.

              Chris Perruna’s responses will ring true to traders who have traversed
          their initial learning curves; he focuses on some of the universals of suc-
          cessful trading:

              Understand Me
              “The most powerful tool I have found in life and in this specific case,
              the market,” Chris explains, “is what I, as a person, am capable of do-
              ing. I finally understand that personal characteristics that are ingrained
              in my DNA will only allow me to trade successfully under specific cir-
              cumstances. For example, I am much more consistent and profitable as
              a medium-term and longer-term trend trader than as a day trader (even
              more so on the long side). I don’t need to be everything all the time
              as long as I continue to focus on the areas that bring me the greatest
