P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                             239

          winners and losers will tell you a great deal about your execution of trade
          ideas—whether you’re entering at points that provide you with favorable
          returns relative to the heat that you’re taking. The data will also tell you
          how well you’re sticking to your risk management discipline, particularly
          stop-losses. If your average win size and loss size are expanding or con-
          tracting at the same time, you may simply be dealing with greater or lesser
          market volatility (or you may be sizing your positions larger or smaller). It
          is the relative shifts in size of average wins and losses that are most impor-
          tant for managing your business. If your winners are increasing in average
          size and your losers are decreasing, you’re obviously trading quite well. It
          will be important to identify what you’re doing right so that you can be con-
          sistent with it. Conversely, when losers are increasing in average size and
          winners are not, you want to figure out where the problem lies. Are you
          reading markets wrong, executing and managing trades poorly, or both?

          Average Win/Loss Per Trade
          Suppose you make a particular amount of money in January and the same
          amount in February. You might be tempted to conclude that you traded
          equally well in the two months. That would be a mistake, however. If you
          had placed 50 trades in the first month and 100 in the second month, then
          you can see that more trading did not produce more profit. Your average
          profit per trade actually declined. This suggests that at least some of your
          trading is not providing good returns, and that bears investigation. The sit-
          uation is similar to that of a business that opens five new stores in a year,
          but reports the same sales volume year over year. The average sales per
          store have actually declined, an important factor masked by the increase
          in overall activity. Average win/loss per trade will vary with your position
          sizing and with overall market volatility. Be alert for occasions in which
          market volatility may increase, but your average win per trade goes down:
          you may not be trading as well in shifting market conditions. Many times,
          traders make as much or more money if they simply focus on their best
          ideas and reduce their total number of trades. This selectivity shows up as
          a soaring average win per trade. It’s a great measure of the efficiency of
          your trading efforts.

              When you trade more often, make sure that the incremental trades
              are adding economic value.


          Variability of Daily Returns
          If you take your wins and losses for each day and convert those to abso-
          lute values, you’ll then have a distribution of your returns. You’ll see how
          much your equity curve moves per day on average. You’ll also observe the
