P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          173


               In Enhancing Trader Performance, I outlined how a cognitive journal
          can be used to help traders restructure their thought processes. The journal
          format I suggested took the form of a single page for each trading day or
          week (depending on the frequency of your trading), with each page taking
          the form of a table. The left-hand column of the table describes the events
          that occurred at the time you experienced a trading problem. This column
          would include what was happening in the market, what you were planning,
          and how you entered—or didn’t enter—the market.
               The second column is an account of how you are talking to yourself
          about the problem. In the book, I took the traditional approach of using
          the second column to describe your beliefs about the events. What may
          be most helpful to your self-coaching, however, is to actually transcribe
          your thoughts about the events and capture what you’re thinking and
          feeling. This column should capture the ideas going through your head at
          the time as faithfully as possible, as in, “Why didn’t I take the trade when I
          had it? I should have been up money today and instead I’ve lost more than
          I should. I am so disgusted with myself. I don’t know if I even want to keep
          trading.”
               Many times, key phrases from your transcribed self-talk will alert you
          to the nature of the schemas being activated. For instance, in the example
          above, the word should is often a good sign that a perfectionist self-worth
          schema is playing itself out, leading to angry self-talk and a discouraged
          frame of mind. Once the musts and shoulds are triggered, they turn the
          trader’s attention away from markets and toward the issue of self-worth.
          Note that this is not happening in a constructive context; rather, the self-
          talk is critical and punitive. It is difficult to see how such thinking could
          move a trader forward.
               I like to think of these automatic thoughts from the second column as a
          kind of tape recorder in the brain that clicks on during particular situations
          (first column). Many times, the very same phrases and messages recur from
          situation to situation. This process becomes easy to observe when review-
          ing your cognitive journal: you see not only how negative the self-talk can
          be, but also how automatic and robotic it is.


              Pay particular attention to emotional words and phrases that recur
              in your self-talk: These words and phrases are shaped by our core
              schemas.

              The third column describes what happens as a result of the self-talk:
          the feelings you have and the actions you take. For instance, in the exam-
          ple above, those angry, perfectionist thoughts might lead you to quit for
          the day and sulk, missing opportunity and a chance to learn about current
