P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          148                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          about how you’re doing and will keep your motivation up, even as you seem
          to plateau in your efforts. One of the helpers at a diet center will help you
          track your weight loss, providing you with positive feedback when you’re
          working the plan. Day after day, exposure to this encouragement makes
          it easier for you to generate your own encouraging self-talk. You become
          your own coach, in part, by internalizing the role of an actual helper.
                To achieve this benefit, it is not necessary that your mentor be pro-
          fessionally trained or that your relationship with them be a commercial
          one. Alcoholics Anonymous is a great example of a peer organization in
          which experienced members aid newcomers. The group meetings provide
          a supportive environment for change; the slogans and readings provide a
          shared set of beliefs and commitments; and the relationship with a sponsor
          provides the motivation of working with someone who cares about your
          life. The net effect is to mirror a new identity for the participant: an iden-
          tity as a recovering person, not simply that of a failed addict.
                As a trading coach, I work hard to take money out of the equation
          with the traders and portfolio managers I work with. I routinely receive
          phone calls and e-mail from traders who update me on their progress. I
          wouldn’t think of billing for that. That’s not because I’m an altruist; it’s
          because I want to emphasize that this isn’t simply about the money. I want
          no impediments to a trader calling me, and I want the trader calling me
          because I care about what happens to them, not because I want to generate
          a billing. For me, it’s about the relationship and doing everything I can to
          aid the trader’s happiness and success, and my hope is that it becomes that
          way for the traders as well. Frequently, my motivation to see the trader
          succeed carries him through the rocky periods of self-doubt. It’s easier for
          me to see his strengths than it is for him at such times.

              A good coach is one who never loses sight of the best within you.


               As your own trading coach, you don’t need to hire someone like me
          in order to make meaningful change or to extend your change efforts
          to an interpersonal context. Rather, you can maximize your efforts at
          self-development by creating your own performance team—a group of
          like-minded, mutually concerned peers who help each other. If I were
          going into full-time trading, one of my first steps would be to scour blog
          comments, forum postings, conference attendees, and similar gatherings
          of traders to find people who trade my markets and take trading seri-
          ously. I wouldn’t need clones, just traders who are compatible with me
          in their trading instruments and time frames. I would then reach out to
          form what I call virtual trading groups: a group of peers who trade their
          own capital, but freely share ideas and help one another. The group would
          have to be chosen carefully, and all participants would have to share their
