P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          168                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          this is going to get me nowhere. A different perspective on the situation is,
          “What’s the worst that could happen? Will this really be a catastrophe?” By
          pushing myself to entertain the worst-case scenario, I see how foolish it is
          to get worked up. Rarely is the likely consequence commensurate with the
          extent of the pressure I’m placing on myself. That, after all, is what makes
          the schema distorted!

              When we change the lenses through which we view events, we
              change our responses to those events.

               What are your most exaggerated emotional responses to markets? Do
          you feel angry when ideas don’t work out; devastated after losses; stricken
          by fear during volatile periods? Or perhaps you swing from overconfident,
          cocky feelings to feelings of despair and worthlessness? Your strongest
          feelings are reflections of your most entrenched thought patterns, and
          those feelings reflect your core schemas:
            r Schemas of justice—“I put in my work; I should make money.”
            r Schemas of catastrophe—“It would be terrible if my trade didn’t
              work out.”
            r Schemas of safety—“I can’t act; the market is too dangerous.”
            r Schemas of self-worth—“I’m a total failure; I can’t make money.”
            r Schemas of rejection—“I’ll look like such a fool if I can’t succeed at
              this.”

               It’s easy to see how these schemas naturally lead to exaggerated emo-
          tions of anger, frustration, fear, and depression. As your own trading coach,
          you want to use your most extreme feelings to figure out your most dis-
          torted ways of viewing yourself and your trading. If you’re managing risk
          properly, there should be nothing overly threatening about any single
          trade or any single day’s trading. If you find yourself responding to mar-
          kets with a high degree of threat, then you know that the problem is not
          the markets themselves or even your trading, but the interpretations you’ve
          placed on your trading results.
               Please read those last two sentences again, slowly. If you are trad-
          ing well—with plans built on demonstrated edges, with proper risk
          control—trading will have its stresses, but should not be filled with dis-
          tress. Markets cannot make us feel anxious, depressed, or angry; the threat
          lies in how we view our market outcomes.
               One exercise I like to conduct when I find myself responding to trad-
          ing with strong emotion is to simply ask, Am I reacting to the situation as
          it really is, or am I reacting to what I’m telling myself about the situa-
          tion? That question forces me to confront my thinking and ask whether the
