P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          279

              distinct patterns and trade setups I use for trade entry, management,
              and exit.”


              By tracking ideal trades, we internalize best practices.


               Following Brian and Corey, your task for this lesson is to structure
          your process of review. One task should include a review of the market
          day, comparing your trades to the actual moves in the market, so that you
          are learning both about you and about the patterns you want to be trading.
          Mentoring yourself is not an occasional activity to be performed during
          losing periods. Rather, among the best traders, it is a regular process em-
          bedded into each trading day. Compare what you did with what you could
          have done as a great way to track your progress and bring yourself closer
          to your ideals.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you coordinate your learning with a trading partner, compare your ideas
          of the best setups for the markets you are trading. If you see markets through
          the eyes of others, you can enrich your own pattern recognition.




          LESSON 85: KEEP DETAILED RECORDS

          Two of the respondents to my question—two whose work I’ve followed for
          years now—independently arrived at similar answers. This is not because
          they trade similarly. Instead, it’s a reflection of the wisdom they’ve accu-
          mulated over years of tackling markets and honing their own performance.
               Charles Kirk is a trader, portfolio manager, and author of The Kirk
          Report blog site (www.thekirkreport.com). He also maintains a portion of
          his site for members, who are treated to his stock picking tools and selec-
          tions. Much writing focuses on when to trade; Charles’s forte is selecting
          what to trade. His blog is among the few on the Web that comprehensively
          links to articles on key themes that deal with markets and the economy.
          This is a particularly valuable resource for those who want to stay on top
          of the market’s larger picture. If you want to see how institutional money
          might move markets, it makes sense to focus on the themes tracked by in-
          stitutional money managers. Charles seems to have a knack for identifying
          those themes.
