P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                             285

              success. Understanding me has been my holy grail of understanding
              how to trade the market with consistency and profitability.” Chris’s in-
              sight is critically important: you don’t make yourself fit a market or
              trading style; you find the markets and styles that best fit you. Suc-
              cessful traders trade within themselves: they stick to what they do best
              and ignore the rest.


              Find what you do best and fashion trading strategies around that.


              Learning to Cut Losses
              “It’s almost cliché,” Chris points out, “but not many people can do it in
              any aspect of life. I have learned to cut losses in my trading, my career,
              my hobby of competitive poker, and everywhere else in life where the
              rule applies. Without this rule, there wouldn’t be a third rule.” Chris
              makes a valuable point: you can’t live one way and trade another.
              It’s hard to imagine being totally disciplined in trading and lax in other
              areas of life. Good trading practice is a philosophy of living: pursuing
              opportunity, managing risk, limiting losses, and diversifying positions.
              Chris trades the way he lives.

              Study and Work Hard
              It is difficult to find a successful trader who does not place hard work
              at the center of what she does. “It is extremely important to my success
              for me to continuously study the markets on a fundamental and tech-
              nical level and learn from my successes and mistakes,” Chris points
              out. “Applying the knowledge gained from past experience allows me
              to properly analyze similar situations in the future with slightly greater
              odds of success. Never stop learning is a phrase I will never stop say-
              ing, as it proves to be truer as I get older.”

               Notice how both Dave and Chris emphasize the importance of know-
          ing when they’re wrong. This is an important difference between begin-
          ning traders and experienced ones. The beginners focus on being right, as
          Chris pointed out. Beginners try to avoid being wrong. The experienced
          traders know they’ll be wrong on a significant proportion of their trades
          and fully accept that. Their self-coaching is designed to help them antici-
          pate and manage losses, not avoid them. They have a plan for each trade
          to deal with loss, and they have an overall trading plan to deal with periods
          of drawdown. Your assignment for this lesson is to use your trading jour-
          nal to flag your fallibility, identifying the five largest losing days in the past
