P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008    9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                       55


          well for the presentation. You’re nervous going into the session, but you
          remind yourself that you know your stuff and have done this before.
               As you launch into your talk, you notice that the audience is not es-
          pecially attentive. One person takes out his phone and starts texting while
          you’re talking. Another person seems to be nodding off. The thought enters
          your mind that you’re not being sufficiently engaging. You’re losing their
          interest, and you fear that you might also be losing the job. You decide to
          improvise something original and attention grabbing, but your nervousness
          gets in the way. Losing your train of thought, you stumble and awkwardly
          return to your prepared script. Performance anxiety has taken you out of
          your game, and your presentation suffers as a result.
               Performance anxiety occurs any time our thinking about a perfor-
          mance interferes with the act of performing. If we worry too much while
          taking a test, we can go blank and forget the material we’ve studied. If we
          try too hard to make a foul shot at the end of a basketball game, we can toss
          a brick and lose the game. The attention that we devote to the outcome of
          the performance takes away from our focus on the process of performing.
               This is a common problem among traders, probably the most common
          one that I encounter in my work at proprietary trading firms and hedge
          funds. Sometimes the performance anxiety occurs when a trader is do-
          ing well and now tries to take more risk by trading larger positions. Other
          times, traders enter a slump and become so concerned about losing that
          they fail to take good trades. A trader may feel so much pressure to make a
          profit that she may cut winning trades short, never letting ideas reach their
          full potential. As with the public speaker, the performance anxiety takes
          traders out of their game, leading them to second-guess their research and
          planning.


              More on performance anxiety and how to handle it: http://
              traderfeed.blogspot.com/2007/04/my-favorite-techniques-for-
              overcoming.html

              As we’ve seen in this chapter, our distressful emotions don’t just come
          from situations: they are also a function of our perception of those situ-
          ations. If I’m convinced that I’m a hot job candidate and believe that I
          have many job options, I won’t feel unduly pressured in an interview or
          presentation. When I came out of graduate school, I went to a job inter-
          view in upstate New York and was asked by the clinic director to identify
          my favorite approach to doing therapy. I smiled and told him that I pre-
          ferred primal scream therapy. That broke the ice, we had a good laugh,
          and the interview went well from there. I knew that, if this interview didn’t
          work out, other opportunities would arise. That freed me up to be myself.
