P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          74                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          one with the performance, executing skills in a highly competent manner,
          seemingly without conscious effort.
               The zone is not an emotional state, though it brings feelings of emo-
          tional well-being and certainly can be disrupted by negative emotional
          states. Entering the zone requires immersion: a total focus on what one
          is doing. In that sense, the zone is a state of heightened attention: it is the
          result of being fully focused and involved in an activity.
               Note that we can behave automatically—and even in skilled ways—
          without being immersed in our activity and without experiencing the zone.
          Repetitive, routine tasks, such as driving a car on an empty road or walking
          a city street, don’t require particular attention and also don’t usually bring
          any experience of well-being. To enter the zone, one must expend mental
          effort at a task that absorbs all of one’s attention. Though performance in
          the zone may seem effortless, it is far from robotic.
               Earlier—and in Enhancing Trader Performance—I emphasized the
          importance of niche: performing in an area that captures one’s talents,
          skills, and interests. A good barometer of whether you are operating within
          your niche is the relative proportion of time you spend in the zone while en-
          gaged in performance. For me, those flow experiences are relatively com-
          mon when I’m writing. Rarely do I operate from a detailed outline. Rather, I
          think about a topic and let the thoughts and words flow as I type. Similarly,
          when I’m working with a person in counseling, I’m completely focused on
          what they’re saying, what it means, and how to use the information to be
          of assistance. It’s not at all unusual for time to fly by quickly while I’m in a
          meeting with someone; I’m so immersed in the interaction that I lose track
          of the passage of time.
               I most often find a zone state in trading when I’m actively figuring
          out markets—absorbing myself in research—and applying those insights
          to short-term trades. In an important sense, it’s the puzzle-solving aspect of
          trading and not the placing of trades themselves that captures my attention.
          If I try to trade in a mechanical fashion without engaging in the problem
          solving, I find trading psychologically noxious. It’s like talking with people
          in a superficial social context. There’s no meat on the bones cognitively;
          my attention remains unengaged, and I stay out of the zone.
               One of the most damaging psychological patterns I see among traders
          is that they attempt to create a counterfeit zone by trading with too much
          risk. In other words, traders are not intrinsically interested in markets and
          the process of trading, so they attempt to create interest and attention by
          making large wagers on trade ideas. This is problematic for obvious rea-
          sons: it exposes traders to outsized losses and potential risk of ruin. Psy-
          chologically, however, it is also ruinous. Once the trader habituates to one
          level of risk, a higher level is needed to grab attention and interest—much
          as addicts require greater doses of a drug to achieve a high. Eventually the
