P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          321


               Let’s set that up as an exercise. We’ll download data for the S&P 500
          Index (cash close) for the past 1,000 trading days. That information will
          give us roughly four years of daily data. If I obtain the data from Pinnacle
          Data, I’ll open a blank sheet in Excel; click on the Excel menu item for
          File; click Open; go to the Data folder in the C drive; double-click on the
          IDXDATA folder; select All Files as the Files of type; and double-click the
          S&P 500 file. I’ll highlight the cells for the past 1,000 sessions; click on
          the Edit menu item in Excel; click on Copy; open a new, blank spread-
          sheet; then click the Edit menu item again; and click Paste, with the cur-
          sor highlighting the A2 cell. The data from the Pinnacle sheet will ap-
          pear in my worksheet, leaving row A for data labels (Date, Open, High,
          Low, Close).
               If you download your data from another source, your menu items to ac-
          cess the data will differ, but the result will be the same: you’ll copy the data
          from your source and paste them into the blank spreadsheet at cell A2, then
          create your data labels. As a result, your raw data will occupy columns A–E.
          (Column A will be Date; column B will be Open; column C will be High; col-
          umn D will be Low; and column E will be Close.) Now, for the data label for
          column F (cell F1), you can type (without quotation marks): “SP(1).” This
          is your independent variable, the current day’s rate of change in the index.
          Your first entry will go into cell F3 and will be (again without quotations
          marks): “=((E3-E2)/E2)* 100).” This is the percentage change in the index
          from the close of the session at A2 to the close of the session at A3.
               Now let’s create our dependent variable in cell G7, with column G la-
          beled SP+1 at G1. Your formula for cell G3 will be “=((E4-E3)/E3)* 100).”
          This represents the next day’s percentage return for the index.
               To complete your sheet, you would click and highlight the formula
          cells at F3 and G3; click on the Excel menu item for Edit; and select the
          option for Copy. You’ll see the F3 and G3 cells specially highlighted. Then,
          with your cursor highlighting cells F4 and G4, drag your mouse down the
          full length of the data set and release, highlighting all those cells. Click
          again on the Excel menu item for Edit, then select Paste. Your spreadsheet
          will calculate the formulas for each of the cells and the data portion of your
          spreadsheet will be finished. The raw data will be in columns A–E. The in-
          dependent variable (our candidate predictor) will be in column F; and our
          variable of trading interest—the dependent variable—will reside in column
          G. Save this spreadsheet as Practice Sheet in an Excel folder. We’ll be using
          it for future lessons.
               Note that we downloaded 1,000 days worth of data, but the actual num-
          ber of data points in our sample is 998. We could not compute SP(1) from
          the first data point because we didn’t have the prior day’s close; hence we
          had to begin our formula in the third data row. We also could not compute
          SP+1 from the last data point because we don’t know tomorrow’s closing
