P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          282                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              to adjust as conditions change. Learning new trading strategies or new
              ways to test old ones can be very fruitful. It’s a lot of work, but anyone
              afraid of hard work shouldn’t be risking his or her capital. It isn’t just
              trading-related stuff, either. I try to push myself into uncomfortable
              situations and experience new places, new people. That helps broaden
              my perspectives so I don’t get closed-minded to new approaches.”

               What most struck me about Jason’s insights was that writing thoughts
          down led to self-discovery. When he tracked his trades and emotions, he
          found that he was often nervous prior to winning trades. This tracking
          helped him not succumb to nerves when putting on a trade. It is this con-
          stant desire to learn new things—about self and market—that keeps trad-
          ing challenging and interesting as a career. Tracking also helps the trader
          adapt to shifting market conditions. Jason Goepfert and Charles Kirk are
          not afraid of the hard work: they spend a great deal of time developing, re-
          viewing, and testing their strategies. There is nothing get rich quick about
          their approaches to markets. Their record keeping is their way of sustain-
          ing a learning curve.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to create an indexing system for
          your own trading journal, so that you can track themes associated with
          what you’re doing and how well you’re doing it. Tracking means catego-
          rizing your trades by strategy/setup, by markets, by results, and by your
          specific market and personal observations. Keep a journal in electronic
          form, such as through the StockTickr service (www.stocktickr.com), as
          one way of indexing your ideas. Another method is to turn your journal
          into a trading blog, with tags for various topics. Still another approach is to
          maintain your journal in a formal database, like Charles Kirk. Your records
          need to be living, breathing entities that you can frequently review for
          insight and perspective. Imagine your trades organized by market, market
          condition, trade setup, time of day, and size, so that you can pull up your
          results for any given market situation. Organized in this manner, your ex-
          perience may just become your greatest trading coach—as it has been for
          Charles and Jason.


                     COACHING CUE

          Consider a portion of your journal devoted solely to research: developing and
          tracking new trade ideas. Charles and Jason continuously search and research
          for trade ideas as market conditions change. What is working in the current
          market environment? Which stocks are moving? Which patterns are showing up?
          Journal about the markets as well as about your trading to help you anticipate
          opportunity.
