P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          142                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          planning and lets the market do what it will do. Notice how keeping a clear
          distinction between the old and new helps traders identify with positive,
          constructive patterns and maintain distance from old, automatic ones.


              “Am I reacting to markets or to my feelings from the past?”—This
              is the question that follows from self-observation.

               Another way to frame this distinction is to focus on “here’s what I
          do to make money; here’s what I do to lose money.” Whenever you en-
          tertain a certain thought or course of action, ask yourself, “Is this how I
          think/act when I make money, or is it how I think/act when I lose money?”
          Once again, by focusing on the likely outcomes of what you’re doing, you
          become the observer of your patterns and interrupt the automatic replay-
          ing of those patterns.
               As we saw earlier in discussing the costs of patterns, focusing on the
          consequences of destructive patterns from the past not only keeps those
          patterns alien, but also heightens your motivation to not repeat them. If
          you recall a recent incident of losing money or opportunity as the result
          of falling into old habits, it is a great way to avoid making the same mis-
          take again, particularly if that recollection highlights the monetary cost and
          emotional pain of the incident. In The Psychology of Trading, I emphasize
          the importance of treating old, negative patterns as an enemy. If you view
          something as an enemy, it’s difficult to embrace it and it becomes easier to
          sustain efforts at changing it.
               Most people are uncomfortable with the emotion of hate. We’ve been
          taught that it’s not right to hate; that we should be nice to others. Hate,
          however, has its uses. Hate implies total rejection—a complete pushing
          away from the self. When we hate our past patterns, we are so attuned
          to their destructive consequences that we will move heaven and earth to
          not repeat them. The addict who has seen the destructive consequences of
          substance abuse learns to hate drugs; the person who has gone through a
          painful marriage and divorce to a narcissistic partner is so disgusted with
          the experience that she’ll never make that same mistake again. There is
          no question in my mind that I would not have found my life partner had
          I not had prior, unsatisfying relationships. I so hated the way I felt in bad
          relationships that I was absolutely determined to find something better.

              When we hate how our old patterns have hurt us, we find a source
              of positive motivation: the drive for a better life.

             There’s an old saw in Alcoholics Anonymous that alcohol abusers
          have to hit bottom before they sustain efforts at sobriety. Before serious
