P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          20                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          sustain a consistent self-image. As a developing trader, you are like that
          young child. Your ability to create powerful mirroring experiences will
          make a difference in your ability to sustain the optimism and courage to
          weather drawdowns and aggressively pursue opportunity.
               Please take note of the following principle: If you limit your losses,
          pursue your strengths, and take concrete steps toward mastery, every sin-
          gle trading day can be a positive experience, even when you’re not making
          money. You cannot eliminate losing days, but there should never be days
          that leave you feeling like a loser.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you construct your report cards, grade yourself based on your improve-
          ment, not based on an abstract (or perfectionist) standard of success. If you
          manage your trades better today than yesterday, that merits a good grade. Your
          goal is to improve; by focusing on improvement, you create powerful mirrors
          of self-development. Relative, not absolute, goals will get you to your desired
          endpoint, and they will ensure an enjoyable and empowering journey.



          LESSON 7: CHANGE OUR FOCUS

          A valuable psychological rule is that if you wish to change the doing, you
          must change the viewing. How we see the world colors how we respond
          to life events. We don’t just react to markets, but also to how we process
          those markets. Our thoughts are the filters between trading and trader.
               Many times we respond in exaggerated ways to markets, not because
          there’s anything unusual going on in the instruments we’re trading, but be-
          cause a set of negative thoughts have intruded into our performance. Let’s
          say, for instance, that I notice that the ES futures are unable to surmount
          their overnight highs during the opening minutes of trade despite a few
          flurries of buying. I then observe that large traders are coming into the mar-
          ket hitting bids. I hypothesize that we cannot sustain strength and that the
          overnight highs will not be breached. I further infer that we will trade back
          into yesterday’s price range and hit the average trading price from that ses-
          sion. I wait for a bounce higher in the NYSE TICK that cannot make a fresh
          price high and use the occasion to sell the futures. As the position moves
          my way, however, the thought enters my mind that I should take quick
          profits because I’ve had a losing week thus far. A buy program then hits
          the market and my position ticks higher, eroding some paper profit. Now
          especially concerned, I take a small profit—only to see the market weaken
          notably and eventually hit my initial price target.
