P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          30                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              idea, not because he had violated risk-management discipline. My job
              was then to help him become more ready for the change he needed
              to make, just as an alcohol counselor must help an alcoholic become
              more ready to commit to sobriety. You will change when you’re ready
              to change, and you’ll be ready to change when you recognize that you
              need to change. As we saw earlier, by becoming more emotionally con-
              nected to the consequences of our behavior, we cultivate that need to
              change.
           2. Ready, Steady, Go. One of the traps that eager traders fall into when
              they start coaching is that they want to make many changes all at once.
              As a result, traders overload themselves with too many goals, water
              down their focus, and never adequately follow through with any of
              them. If you have a list of five changes to make, select the one that
              you’re most ready to make (as noted above): the one that you’re most
              committed to taking action on. Work on that one goal intensively and
              daily until you make and sustain significant progress; then move to
              the next change. The momentum from your success with the first effort
              will carry over and help your work with the others. If you begin with a
              goal that you should work on, but aren’t fully committed to, you’ll stall
              out on your entire coaching effort. Keep your work doable, but keep
              it steady. Build momentum and success, and that will help with your
              later change efforts


               When you coach yourself, focus your efforts and let one success
               fuel others.


           3. Double Down. When you first make a desired change, don’t let up.
               Rather, focus on what you did to make that change and redouble your
               efforts. Make your goal to sustain that change. All too often, traders
               let up once they make an initial improvement. That’s like hurting your
               opponent in a boxing ring and then not moving in to finish him off.
               You want progress to double your motivation, not let your bad habits
               off the hook. We’ve seen that the enemy of change is relapse: all of
               us too easily fall back into old patterns if we’re not making conscious
               and sustained efforts to build new ones. The key to change is relapse
               prevention: repeating new patterns so often that they become natural
               to us. Any change worthy of pursuit is worth repeating 30 times in 30
               days. In Alcoholics Anonymous, a committed new member will attend
               90 meetings in 90 days; “bring the body in and the mind will follow”
               is the slogan. Make the change consistently enough and it will be your
               change.
