P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                                251


          poorly won’t sell. A phenomenal game plan by a top coach won’t work
          on the basketball court if the players don’t pass well and can’t establish
          position underneath the basket for rebounds. The quarterback can call a
          great play, but if the line doesn’t block, the pass will never get off.
               So it is with trading: execution is a much larger part of success than
          most traders realize. The average trader spends a great deal of attention on
          getting into a market, but it’s the management of that trade idea that often
          determines its fate. When you are the manager of your trading business,
          you want to focus on day-in and day-out execution, just as you would if
          you were running your own store.
               A trade idea begins with the perception that an index, commodity, or
          stock is likely to be repriced. For example, we may perceive that a stock
          index is trading at one level of value, but is likely to be trading at a different
          level. Our rationale for believing this may be grounded in fundamentals:
          at our forecasted levels of interest rates and earnings growth, the index
          should be trading at X price rather than Y. Our rationale might be purely
          statistical: the spread between March and January options contracts on the
          index is historically high and we anticipate a return to normal levels. Too,
          we may use technical criteria for our inference: the market could not break
          above its long-term range, so we expect it to probe value levels at the lower
          end of the range. In each case, the trade idea takes the form: “We’re trading
          here at this price, but I hypothesize we’ll be trading there at that price.”
               What this suggests is that a fully formed trade idea includes not just
          an entry setup, but also a profit target. Too often that target is not made
          clear and explicit, but still it lies at the heart of any trade idea. A trade only
          makes sense if we expect prices to move in an anticipated way to an extent
          that is meaningful relative to the risk we are taking.

              Just as businesses set target returns on their investments, traders
              target returns on their trade ideas.

               It is in this context that every trade is a hypothesis: our belief re-
          garding the proper pricing of the asset represents our hypothesis, and our
          trade can be thought of as a test of that hypothesis. As markets move,
          they provide incremental support for or disconfirmation of the hypothesis.
          That means that, as trades unfold, we either gain or lose confidence in our
          hypothesis.
               Any good scientist not only knows when a hypothesis is supported,
          but also when it is not finding support. A hypothesis is only meaningful if it
          can be objectively tested and falsified. The outcome that would falsify our
          trade hypothesis is what we set as a stop-loss level. It is the counterpart
          to the target; if the target defines the possible movement in our favor, the
