P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38   Printer: Yet to come




          246                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          those periods of high risk-aversion, traders will often shun stocks and seek
          the perceived safety of bonds and gold. The three asset classes (equities,
          fixed income, and gold) will thus trade in a highly correlated manner. In-
          stead of being diversified across three markets, your capital is effectively
          concentrated in one.
              When your trading results are becoming more correlated, your self-
          coaching will lead you to ask whether the correlations are due to biases
          in your trade selection or due to shifts among the markets. In the first
          instance, you can make special efforts to seek out uncorrelated ideas; in
          the second, you may want to reduce the size of each of your trades so that
          you have less concentrated risk. What you want to avoid are situations in
          which all your trading and investment eggs are in a single package. That can
          produce fine returns for a while, but leaves a trading business vulnerable
          when market conditions change.
              My coaching experience with traders suggests that they most often
          achieve sound diversification in one or more ways:

            r Blending intraday trading with swing trading or blending longer-term
              trading/investing with shorter-term swing trading.
            r Blending directional trading (being long or short a particular instru-
              ment) with relative value trading (being long one instrument and short
              another, related one).
            r Blending one strategy (such as trading around earnings events) with
              another (trading opening range breakouts).
            r Blending the trading of one market or asset class (such as a currency
              pair) with another (U.S. small cap stocks).

              For example, a trader might be long high-yielding stocks as one idea. A
          second idea would have the trader selling the front end of the yield curve
          and buying the long end, perhaps in anticipation of yield curve flattening
          ahead of Fed tightening. A third idea would have the trader short value
          stocks and long growth issues, anticipating that a historically wide spread
          in performance between the two will revert to its norm. A fourth idea
          might be a short-term long trade on small cap stocks. The good thing about
          spread/pairs trades, such as ideas two and three, is that they can work re-
          gardless of the direction of the underlying market, providing a measure of
          diversification. Trading horizons widen considerably when you don’t just
          ask if a market is going up or down, but start to think about what will go
          up or down versus other things.
              High frequency day traders will tend to achieve diversification and
          low correlation in other ways. They will demonstrate a relatively even
          mix of long and short trades over time. They may also manage positions
          over different time frames or place different trades in different stocks and
