P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          48                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               positions. Each rule should receive an A, B, C, D, or F grade. Anything
               less than a B is a candidate to become an explicit goal for the next day’s
               trading. In this way, the rules you most need to work on are assured of
               getting the most attention.

               This approach undercuts the tendency to press during periods of frus-
          tration by helping you catch yourself in the act of deviating from rules. As
          a result, frustration is unlikely to escalate into ever-greater violations of
          sound trading principles. When you cement your rules through repetition,
          however, you also serve as your own trading coach by preventing frus-
          tration from affecting trading in the first place. After all, we can start our
          day on a frustrating note (perhaps we oversleep), but that won’t lead us
          to shatter our rule-habits of morning personal hygiene. Behavior patterns,
          once overlearned, stick with us regardless of our emotional state. That is
          true self-control.
               Good self-coaching is the ability to correct trading problems. Great
          self-coaching is to develop routines to prevent problems from occurring
          in the first place. You’ll see the results in your mood—and in the dramatic
          reduction of large losing trades, days, and weeks.


                      COACHING CUE

          Don’t work at internalizing too many rules at one time. Start with the most
          important rules that will keep you in the game: entry rules (getting good prices);
          position-sizing rules (limiting risk per position); and exit rules (setting clear
          proﬁt targets and stop-loss levels). These three, along with the basic rationale
          for your trade, can be written down or talked aloud as a trade plan that becomes
          your guide for trading under control instead of pressing.




          LESSON 16: WHEN YOU’RE READY
          TO HANG IT UP

          One of the most difficult manifestations of distress that traders face is
          despair. I’ve seen it happen to the best of traders: you work hard, you feel
          as though you’re on the brink of a positive breakthrough, and then you
          take several steps backward. It feels as though you’re getting nowhere.
          You’re tired of being wrong, tired of losing money. That excitement that
          used to greet the start of the market day is replaced with dread. It’s difficult
          to sustain the research and the morning routines of preparation. If your
          body could talk, its posture would say, “What’s the use?” You’re ready to
          hang it up.
