P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                         165


               Schemas are not just collections of thoughts, but are complexes of
          thoughts, feelings, and action tendencies. Let’s say, for example, that I was
          beaten severely as a child and now perceive the world as a dangerous place.
          One of my schemas might be that, “You can’t trust people; they’ll hurt you.”
          When others try to get to know me, that schema becomes a lens through
          which I view their behavior. Instead of responding with friendliness, I raise
          my guard and distance myself. Because of the schema, I’ve interpreted their
          behavior as dangerous.
               Sometimes schemas, as the lenses through which we view events, are
          distorted. They lead us to view and respond to events in exaggerated ways,
          as in the example above. Take the example of the trader who views his
          worth through his profit/loss statements. He becomes overconfident and
          expansive when he’s making money, and he turns risk-averse and self-
          doubting when he’s in a slump. As long as his trading results are filtered
          through this schema, he’s likely to think about and respond to his prof-
          itability in distorted ways.
               Problem patterns develop when our distorted responses to the world
          become self-reinforcing. In the example above, because others hurt me,
          I now perceive people as dangerous and untrustworthy—even when they
          approach me in a friendly way. My guardedness makes me seem hostile or
          suspicious to others, and they naturally stop their friendly overtures. That,
          in turn, convinces me that my views of them were right all along, reinforc-
          ing my distorted schema. When we are caught in such self-reinforcing
          patterns, we stop revising our mental maps: we become locked into neg-
          ative ways of perceiving—and responding to—the world.
               Automatic thoughts are the habitual ways of thinking that result from
          our schemas. Once a schema is triggered, it usually sets off a series of
          thoughts and feelings that guide our action. A schema of vulnerable self-
          worth might, for instance, lead us to respond to a market loss with dejec-
          tion and depression and a host of thoughts amounting to, “I’ll never suc-
          ceed.” These thoughts and feelings are not objective assessments of the
          markets or our trading. Rather, they are automatic, learned reactions that
          have become habit patterns.

              We never directly observe our schemas; rather, we experience
              their manifestations through our automatic thoughts.

              The goal of cognitive work is to unlearn these negative thought pat-
          terns and replace them with more realistic ways of viewing the world. This
          restructuring of our thinking means that we, like scientists, must revise our
          theories. The cognitive approach provides methods for accomplishing this
          revision.
