P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          220                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                   visualization of a moderate stress, make the next visualizations
                   more threatening. Don’t stop your exposure work until you have
                   tackled your absolute worst fears.

               This basic exercise enables you to extinguish emotional and behavioral
          responses to trading situations that can lose you money. If you rehearse
          staying calm and focused in stressful situations, you build a new learned
          connection and reprogram your behavioral responses. This process is ef-
          fective for situations in which you’ve been through extreme losses, and it
          is also quite useful in reprogramming patterns of overtrading. When you
          coach yourself to face and overcome your worst fears, you build confi-
          dence, resilience, and a sense of efficacy, empowering yourself in situa-
          tions where you had seemed powerless.


                      COACHING CUE

          Imagery can be powerful in programming new responses, but consider extend-
          ing your exposure work to live trading. Such in-vivo exposure, beginning with
          small trading size and gradually ramping up to full size with success, is the sin-
          gle most eﬀective technique for reprogramming traumatic experiences in trad-
          ing, such as large losses that overwhelm mood and conﬁdence. By re-creating
          the market conditions that caused the trauma in imagery—and then facing those
          conditions in simulated and actual trading—all the while rehearsing self-control
          skills, we can regain a sense of mastery over trading. It takes repeated experi-
          ences of safety during exposure work to undo traumatic stresses. Eventually,
          the emotional learning that we can face our fears without terrible things hap-
          pening sinks in and contributes to a newfound conﬁdence.




          LESSON 69: EXTEND EXPOSURE
          WORK TO BUILD SKILLS

          In the previous lesson, we saw how exposure methods can be used to de-
          program negative behavior patterns. Just a small adjustment in the tech-
          nique is needed to create positive learning by rehearsing and reinforcing
          proper trading behaviors.
               The fundamental difficulty of trading is that we know what to do
          (enter on pullbacks in a trend, size positions appropriately) when we are
          out of the heat of battle. When stressed, however, or when we face un-
          usual opportunity, we find that other behavior patterns are triggered and it
          is much more difficult to do the right things. I work with a good number of
          experienced portfolio managers and proprietary traders, and even they
          make the occasional rookie errors, in which they are swayed by situational
