P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              237


          year. It means knowing how you’re performing and how this compares with
          your normal performance.
               Score keeping makes sense if you once again think of your trading
          as a business. A sophisticated retail clothing firm tracks sales closely ev-
          ery week. Retailers know not only how much they’ve sold in total, but
          how much of each product. Perhaps the economy is slow, so women’s
          accessories—which are lower-priced—are hot, but high-priced clothing is
          not. The company that tracks these trends regularly will be in the best
          position to shift their product mix and maximize profits. Similarly, if one
          store is dramatically underperforming its peers despite a favorable loca-
          tion, managers can use that information to see what might be going wrong
          at the store and make corrections.
               Score keeping in the business world can be extremely detailed. There
          are good reasons for the investments in information systems that we ob-
          serve among the world’s most successful corporations. Firms may track
          sales by hour of the day to help them determine when to open and close.
          Purchasing patterns based on gender and age are factored into advertising
          messages and promotional campaigns. Score keeping provides the busi-
          ness with knowledge; in the business world, knowledge utilized properly is
          power.


              You can’t properly manage your business if you don’t understand
              what it is doing right and wrong.


               Nowhere do we see this power more dramatically than in quality con-
          trol. Firms such as Toyota collect reams of data on their manufacturing
          processes to help them identify lapses in quality, but also to make contin-
          uous improvements in manufacturing processes. If you don’t collect the
          data, you can’t establish the benchmarks that enable you to track progress.
          It’s not just about ensuring that you do well; the best businesses are
          driven to do better.
               When you keep score in your trading business, a few metrics are abso-
          lutely essential. These include:

            r Your equity curve, tracking changes in portfolio value over time.
            r Your number of winning versus losing trades.
            r The average size of your winning trades and the average size of your
              losers.
            r Your average win/loss per trade.
            r The variability of your daily returns.

              Let’s take a look at each metric in a bit of detail.
