P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          256                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Other intermarket themes capture the relative movements of asset
          classes. When the economy weakens and the Federal Reserve has to lower
          interest rates, this has implications not only for how bonds trade, but also
          the U.S. dollar. Lower rates and a weaker dollar might also support the
          prospects of companies that do business overseas, as their goods will be
          cheaper for consumers in other countries. That situation might set up some
          promising stock market ideas.

              Track rises and falls in correlations among sectors and markets as
              a great way to detect emerging themes—and ones that are shifting.


               Short-term traders can detect themes from how markets trade in
          Europe and Asia before the U.S. markets open. Are interest rates rising
          or falling? Commodities? The U.S. dollar? Are overnight traders behav-
          ing in a risk-averse way or are they buying riskier assets and selling safer
          ones? Are Asian or European markets breaking out to new value levels on
          their economic news or on decisions from their central banks? Often, these
          overnight events affect the morning trade in the United States and set up
          trade ideas about whether a market is likely to move to new highs or lows
          relative to the prior day.
               The short-term trader can also develop themes from breaking news
          and the behavior of sectors that are leading or lagging the market. If you
          keep track of stocks and sectors making new highs and lows often, you
          will highlight particular themes that are active in the market. If oil prices
          are strong, you may notice that the shares of alternative energy companies
          are making new highs. That can be an excellent theme to track. Similarly,
          in the wake of a credit crunch, you might find that banking stocks are mak-
          ing new lows. Catching these themes early is the very essence of riding
          trends; after all, a theme may persist even as the broad market remains
          range bound.
               As your own trading coach and the manager of your trading business,
          you need to keep abreast of the marketplace. That means that consider-
          able reading and observation must accompany trading time in front of the
          screen. On my blog, I try to highlight sources of information that are partic-
          ularly relevant to market themes. I update those themes daily with tweets
          from the Twitter messaging application (www.twitter.com/steenbab). Ulti-
          mately, however, you need to figure out the themes that most make sense
          to you and the sources of information for generating and tracking those
          themes. The more you understand about markets, the more you’ll under-
          stand what is happening in your market. Like a quarterback, you need to
          see the entire playing field to make the right calls; it’s too easy to be blind-
          sided by a blitzing linebacker when your gaze is fixed!
