P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          10                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          for the week, however, and instead focus on that fact. The loss is soon
          forgotten. It doesn’t bother me, but I also don’t learn from it. The next time
          frustration hits, I repeat my earlier behavior and lose even more money.
          Disgusted, I decide to take a break from the markets and come back with a
          positive mindset. In reality, however, I merely return in denial, once again
          banishing the losses from my mind. Eventually those trading shortcomings
          catch up to us, forcing us to face them squarely.
               Such self-division is often maintained with the fiction of positive think-
          ing. By focusing on positive thoughts, we don’t have to think about what
          we’ve done wrong; we don’t have to achieve contact with the parts of our-
          selves we don’t like. We become like rooms where the clutter is increas-
          ingly swept under the rug. Eventually our rooms bulge with mental clutter,
          making them uninhabitable.


               The motivation for much positive thinking is a denial of weakness.


               Our daughter Devon was born with a “strawberry” beside her nose: a
          hemangioma that was a bright red bump on her skin. We were told that it
          would eventually recede on its own, that no surgery was needed. During
          her early years, however, baby Devon had a large red mark on her face. We
          could have put a patch over the mark or insisted on surgery, but we didn’t.
          It was her mark, and it was part of what made her who she was. When
          you love someone, even her personal blemishes become endearing. Before
          I was a parent, I used to wonder how I’d tolerate changing dirty diapers.
          When the time came, I actually enjoyed it. It was something I was doing
          with and for my child. The changing of the diaper became an opportunity
          for bonding.
               So it should be when we deal with our own dirty diapers. Your weak-
          nesses are part of you; someone who loves you will love the whole package,
          frailties and all. And if you love yourself, you can reach that point of ac-
          ceptance in which you are fully aware of your shortcomings and appreci-
          ate your very humanness. Indeed, as with the diapers, those shortcomings
          become opportunities—to reach out to yourself and guide your own devel-
          opment. For the longest time, I was unsure of myself in social situations
          and avoided most of them. Then, in a college dorm party I pushed myself
          to organize, I noticed a few people standing around not talking with oth-
          ers. In a flash, I saw myself in them. I made a beeline for the stragglers,
          included them in the gathering, and introduced them around. Ever since,
          I’ve been able to reach out to that reticence in myself and use it as a prod
          to engage others. My development occurred not through positive thinking,
          but through an embrace of my vulnerability.
               Have you lost money recently? Have your trading weaknesses cost you
          money and opportunity? Consider embracing your flaws: every losing trade
