P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                 117

          on the trade itself. If I hear myself talk about something other than the
          management of the present trade, it kicks me into a different mode and
          pushes me to make an effort to get back to the market itself. This shift
          becomes easier and easier as traders learn to make self-observation a habit.


              When you talk aloud your thoughts and feelings, you no longer
              identify with them; you listen to them as an observer.


               A good self-coaching question to ask yourself is: How different would
          your P/L be if you could eliminate the 5 percent of your largest losing
          trades? Often, this percent by itself would make a huge difference to a
          trader’s profitability. By interrupting the patterns that accompany those
          large losers that result from bad trading (not just being wrong on an
          idea), you can “above all else, do no harm.” It’s usually a particular emo-
          tional state or pathway of thinking that triggers the bad trading. If you
          recognize the state and thoughts as they’re occurring, you can stop yourself
          and, at the very least, avoid disaster.
               This recognition would make a wonderful goal to work on in your trad-
          ing. Choose just one negative pattern that has accounted for many of your
          largest losing trades and then identify the common triggers for that pat-
          tern. Then select one method for interrupting the pattern when you no-
          tice one of the triggers occurring—even if that method is doing nothing
          more than placing no more trades until you regain emotional equilibrium.
          A good coach knows when to take his player out of the game for rest and
          a lesson. When you are your own trading coach, sometimes you need to do
          something similar. Remember: the goal is not to trade; the goal is to make
          money. Sometimes the best way to make money over the long haul is to
          ensure that you keep your money when all the wrong patterns are firing.


                      COACHING CUE

          If I say something in a frustrated tone or make a frustrated gesture while I’m
          trying to get into a trade, while I’m managing a trade that’s already on, or while
          I’m trying to exit, that is my signal that I need to interrupt an emerging pattern.
          I typically will slow my breathing considerably and focus on my breathing as I’m
          continuing with my business. As soon as is practical thereafter, I take a short
          break from the screen and don’t enter any new positions until I have ﬁgured out
          why I’m frustrated, what that tells me (about me and/or the market), and how I
          want to factor that into my trading. If you use frustration as a cue to interrupt
          patterns you are prevented from acting mindlessly on the frustration, but also
          you are set up to become mindful of the reasons for the frustration.
