P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                             169

          magnitude of my emotional reaction is truly warranted. If it is not the ob-
          jective situation that creates your feelings, then your emotion has to be
          internally generated, a function of how you are processing events. If the
          emotion is out of proportion to the situation, your thinking about the situ-
          ation must be distorted.

              The greater the distortion in our thinking, the greater the distortion
              in our emotions.

              Make yourself write down what you would have to say to another
          person—another trader—to make them react the way you’ve just reacted.
          What could you say to them that would lead them to respond so extremely?
          The odds are good that what you would tell another person to generate the
          emotion is what you are telling yourself:

            r “You’re no good!”
            r “It’s all your fault!”
            r “You’re going to lose your money!”
            r “You can’t win!”

              If you write down these messages every time you catch yourself in the
          throes of an extreme emotional response, you’ll come close to duplicating
          the output from your cognitive schemas. It’s much easier to redraw mental
          maps when they’re lying open in front of you.


                      COACHING CUE

          A common thought pattern that distorts traders’ reactions to markets is what
          we might call a “justice schema”: the idea that markets should be fair, should of-
          fer opportunity, or should behave as they’ve behaved in the past. Once we lock
          ourselves into notions of how markets should behave, we open ourselves to frus-
          tration and disappointment when they take their own course. Many times, I’ve
          seen traders grow restive, fuming at markets that just aren’t moving. Traders
          become impatient and jump all over any move to new highs or lows, hoping that
          this will be the breakout move—only to ﬁnd the market return to its slow range.
          By challenging yourself when you catch yourself thinking or talking about how
          the market should behave (but isn’t behaving), you can use the frustration to
          channel your energies elsewhere: toward longer time frames in the same mar-
          ket, toward fresh research, or toward other instruments or markets. When we
          react to our own sense of justice and injustice, we no longer objectively process
          actual market activity.
