P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                       139


          is not about opportunity; it’s a defense to keep the feelings of disappoint-
          ment and loss at bay. Of course, this often leads to further losses and a
          fresh set of consequences.
               The defense is there because, deep down, the trader doesn’t believe
          that she can tolerate the hurt or sadness of loss. Perhaps at one time
          of life such pain was indeed intolerable. Now, as a mature adult, the
          trader can handle normal losses, whether in business, markets, or love.
          It doesn’t feel that way, however, and the trader continues to handle losses
          in the old, childhood ways. By crystallizing the pattern, the trader builds
          a self-observing capacity and a clearer awareness of the consequences
          of perpetuating old cycles. It is this heightened awareness that eventu-
          ally enables the trader to challenge defenses and respond to old threats in
          new ways.


              Change in the psychodynamic mode means doing what doesn’t
              come naturally: refrain from the old ways of coping that keep un-
              pleasant feelings at bay.

               In your role as your own trading coach, you interrupt cyclical problems
          by becoming their observer, not the one caught inside the patterns. By ob-
          serving, you stand outside the cycles; they no longer consume you. The
          sine wave and flow charts described earlier are useful tools in sustaining
          this self-awareness. Your goal is to recognize repetitive patterns before they
          have an opportunity to play themselves out to their unhappy conclusions.
               One way of accomplishing this will form the basis for your next coach-
          ing task. You’ll typically observe a pattern beginning to emerge when an
          associated feeling state interrupts your trading. In the revenge-trading ex-
          ample above, that characteristic feeling might be frustration and tension.
          In other situations, the feeling may be one of loss or emptiness. As soon as
          you notice the characteristic feeling, you want to acknowledge it out loud,
          almost as if you are a play-by-play sports announcer. For instance, you
          might say aloud, “I just took a loss and now I’m feeling really frustrated.
          I’m feeling mad, and I want to get my money back. I want to find another
          trade, but that’s what’s hurt me in the past. I jump back into the market and
          it makes things worse.”
               If you cannot invoke this self-observation aloud—perhaps because
          you’re trading in a room with others—a psychological journal can accom-
          plish the same function. The key is to describe in detail what you are think-
          ing and feeling, what you are tempted to do to make the thoughts and feel-
          ings go away, and how this course of action has hurt you in the past. “I’m
          disgusted with myself and I want to just quit trading for the day,” would be
          one self-observation from a trader who rides a cycle of aggressive trading,
