P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               115


          journals, however, they’re likely to find that a single problem pattern—
          anxiety related to negative self-talk—is responsible for all of these. It’s not
          that the trader has many problems (though it may certainly feel that
          way); it’s that there is a single, core problem that affects many aspects of
          the trading process.
               As you can see from the above example, self-coaching requires that
          you not only detect patterns but patterns among the patterns. It’s these
          patterns of patterns that usually form the core focus of coaching efforts.
          This means that if you can accurately identify the core pattern, many dif-
          ferent trading difficulties can fall into place in a reasonable period of time.
          Once the trader in our example learns to master anxiety and not channel
          it through self-defeating self-talk, he will miss far fewer opportunities, be-
          come more consistent in sticking to stop-loss levels, take appropriate risk,
          and let trades progress toward their designated targets.


              Asking yourself, “What is the common denominator behind my dif-
              ferent trading mistakes?” begins the process of finding patterns of
              patterns.

               Often the core pattern will involve a feeling state that recurs for the
          trader and that disrupts good decision-making. For example, the trader
          may lapse into periods of anxiety, frustration, or self-defeat. How this feel-
          ing state impacts trading may vary from day to day, which is what produces
          the multiple manifestations that lead traders to think that they have dozens
          of problems. By tracing each trading problem back to a particular cognitive
          (thinking) or emotional (feeling) state, we can then identify the events that
          typically trigger that state and design effective coaching interventions to
          tackle those situations and triggers.
               Often, a trader will know what he is doing wrong, but won’t know
          the right thing to do. This issue occurs when traders have not been suffi-
          ciently solution-focused. They know, for instance, that they should not dou-
          ble down on losing trades to make money back, but they don’t know how
          to reenter a trade and exploit good research after having been stopped out
          of an initial position. This situation requires two important coaching steps:
          1) interrupt the problem pattern so that it does not disrupt trading; and
          2) develop rules and procedures for a possible solution pattern (which will
          form the theme of the next lesson).
               Because traders don’t always have solutions readily at hand and need
          to stop bleeding losses, interrupting problem patterns is often a first
          coaching objective. “Above all else, do no harm”—the Socratic oath in
          medicine—is relevant here. The ability to stop doing wrong things won’t,
          by itself, generate good things, but it can keep you solvent long enough to
          find solutions!
