P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                  201

          reason; only after considerable review did we figure out that these prob-
          lems occurred when he experienced problems with the firm’s management.
          The frustration led him to seek gratification from his trading, impelling him
          to overtrade. He didn’t make a conscious connection between the two;
          rather, he was trading to manage an emotional state in a simple stimu-
          lus/response manner.
               The cataloging you undertake in your journal may need to cover a con-
          siderable period of time before you notice patterns. What you’re likely to
          find, however, is that how you trade is affected by your physical and emo-
          tional state—which is affected by situational factors at home and work. Un-
          derstanding these contingencies enables you to build some firewalls into
          your trading practice, as we will see in the next several lessons. Without
          such understanding, however, you’re likely to blindly repeat history, losing
          a measure of self-determination. It’s when we create our own contingen-
          cies that we truly possess free will and the ability to pursue our chosen
          goals.


                     COACHING CUE

          Track your daily physical well-being—your state of alertness, your energy level,
          your overall feeling of health—against your daily trading results. Many times
          fatigue, physical tension, and ill health contribute to lapses in concentration
          and a relapse into old, unhelpful behavior patterns. It is diﬃcult to make and
          sustain mental eﬀorts when you lack proper sleep or feel run down from a lack
          of exercise. Very often, our moods are inﬂuenced by our physical states, even
          by factors as subtle as what and how much we eat. When you keep a record of
          your daily performance as a function of your physical condition, you can see
          these relationships for yourself and begin preventive maintenance by keeping
          body—and thus mind—in peak operating condition.




          LESSON 63: HARNESS THE POWER
          OF SOCIAL LEARNING

          One of the greatest mistakes traders can make in coaching themselves is
          to work on their craft in isolation. It is easy to become isolated as a trader,
          particularly given that all it takes is a computer and Internet connection in
          one’s home to access the most liquid markets. During my work with trading
          firms, however, I have consistently seen how access to other professionals
          aids the learning process. From peer professionals you obtain role model-
          ing, encouragement, and valuable feedback on ideas. A social network of
