P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          16                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          of emotion interferes with concentration and performance. Simply yelling
          when we’re angry or pouting when we’re discouraged does nothing to al-
          ter the feelings—and certainly does not place us closer to resolving the
          situations responsible for the upset in the first place. The trader from my
          example, for instance, spent much of his afternoon fuming, but never re-
          solving his anger. Reflexive acting on such emotions only reinforces them;
          you can’t overcome frustration by behaving in frustrated ways.


               Blindly venting or acting on emotion is as unproductive as blinding
               ourselves to emotion; both prevent learning from the information
               in our feelings.

               The idea, then, is to transform feeling, not ignore it and not revel in
          it. One way to do this is to replace one emotional state with another: to
          substitute feeling for feeling, not thought for feeling.
               In my Psychology of Trading book, I explained how I used the
          early music of Philip Glass to enter a meditative state and trance-form
          experience. Actually any stimulus that evokes calm, focused attention
          can be effective as a tool for shifting emotions. The key is to evoke and
          sustain the Yoda state—the calm focus—during periods of high frustration
          or discouragement. Biofeedback can be especially useful in this regard,
          as computer-based applications provide real-time feedback about your
          success in sustaining the altered state. It is virtually impossible to sustain
          a worked-up state—anger, anxiety, and stress—when keeping yourself
          calm and focused. Even better, in the relaxed state, you’ll arrive at per-
          spectives and insights that remain unavailable while you’re immersed in
          the flight-or-fight mode.
               One exercise I recommend to traders is to draw two thermometers side
          by side on a sheet of paper and then run off a number of copies of the pa-
          per. One thermometer records your emotional temperature with respect to
          frustration; the other records your temperature with respect to confidence.
          The sheet stays by your trade station; all you need to do is make a mark on
          each thermometer to indicate how frustrated and confident you’re feeling
          at the time.
               When we’re most frustrated, but also most overconfident, we’re likely
          to make our worst decisions and violate our trading principles. If you re-
          quire yourself to “take your emotional temperature” during each trading
          session, you create a mechanism for catching your state of mind before it
          can disrupt trading performance.
               Once you identify an elevated frustration temperature, a valuable, au-
          tomatic rule is to take a few minutes away from the screen and enter into a
          trance-formation. This can be done by regulating your breathing—making
