P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          124                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          opening the curtains for the actual production. During those practice ses-
          sions, performers condense the coaching process: they learn what they’re
          doing right and wrong, make conscious efforts to repeat their positive per-
          formances and correct their faulty ones, and eventually reach the point
          where their efforts become natural and automatic. Practice is valuable, be-
          cause it creates a safe environment for making mistakes. The game won’t
          be on the line or the play won’t be ruined if a performer tries something
          new and it falls flat in practice.


              Rehearsal speeds the learning curve.


              Practice can be very helpful to your efforts to coach yourself. If you
          identify a specific change to make, the place to begin is in simulated trading
          where no capital is at risk. This can occur in several different ways:

            r Simple Chart Review—Sometimes the changes you make to your
              trading involve decisions regarding how you would enter, exit, or man-
              age risk. When those are your goals, you can review charts and simply
              talk aloud the decisions you’d be making at each juncture. This lacks
              the realism of real-time trading (and cannot substitute for real-life ex-
              perience), but it does slow the decision-making process down to the
              point where you can try new things in a very conscious, reflective man-
              ner. My favorite way of engaging in the chart review is to advance the
              chart on my screen one bar at a time and then talk aloud my percep-
              tions and decisions. This is like first learning to drive a car by driving
              very slowly in a large, empty parking lot. It gives the learner plenty of
              time to crawl before walking and running.
            r Simulated Trading—My charting software comes with a simulation
              feature in which I can place orders and track my profits and losses over
              time. This is helpful because you’re making decisions with real market
              data in real time, but placing no capital at risk. By trading in simulation
              mode, you can gain many days’ worth of experience in a single day. You
              can also focus your attention on the most problematic and challenging
              market occasions, concentrating your skill rehearsal in contexts that
              most call for your new patterns.
            r Trading with Reduced Size—Not all of the changes I seek in my own
              trading are revolutionary. Some are evolutionary tweaks. Recently I
              altered the criteria by which I set profit targets, allowing me to hold
              certain trades for a bit longer. I reduced my trading size in half when I
              traded with the new criteria, knowing that the extended holding times
              would, by themselves, be uncomfortable for me. Once I developed a
              comfort level with the lowered size—and made my mistakes with the
