P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          49


               Let’s face it: for many, there is a time to give up trading. I know
          quite a few traders who have been at it for years and have never devel-
          oped the skills (and perhaps who never had the talent) to simply reach
          a point of competence where they cover their costs. If you are meant
          to do something—something that speaks to your talents, skills, and
          interests—you will display a significant learning curve in the first year
          or two of effort. If such a learning curve is not apparent, it’s probably not
          your calling. Hang it up and pursue something that genuinely captures your
          distinctive abilities. It’s not quitting, it’s not being cowardly. It’s cutting a
          losing position and getting into something better: a course of action that is
          as sound in life planning as in trading.
               If, however, you’ve progressed steadily and have displayed genuine
          ability over time, discouragement and depression are your emotional chal-
          lenges during difficult periods. Becoming your own trading coach requires
          shepherding yourself through the dark times.
               One of my professors in graduate school, Jack Brehm, theorized that
          depression is a form of motivational suppression. When we perceive that
          meaningful goals are within our reach, we naturally experience a surge
          of optimism and energy. This surge helps us make those extra efforts to
          achieve our goals. Conversely, when we see that valued goals are beyond
          our reach, nature has provided us with the means to suppress that motiva-
          tion. After all, it would make no sense to redouble our efforts in the face of
          unachievable ends. That motivational suppression, taking the form of dis-
          couragement and even mild depression, is unpleasant, but it is adaptive in
          its own way. It turns us away from ends we should not be pursuing, which
          frees us up for more energizing efforts.
               In that sense, the feeling of wanting to give up contains useful informa-
          tion. It is not just a negative emotion to be overcome or minimized. Dis-
          couragement tells us that, at that moment, we perceive an unbridgeable
          gap between our real selves (who we are) and our ideal selves (who we
          wish to be). We no longer perceive that we have control over our future:
          our ability to attain goals that are important to us. If we are going to be
          effective coaches of our trading, we need to address this perception.


              Our real selves are always distant from our ideals: the question is
              whether we perceive ourselves to be competent to bridge the gaps.

              The first way to address the real-ideal gap is to consider that, in its
          context, it may point to something based in reality. Perhaps an edge that
          we had counted on in trading is no longer present. Perhaps market pat-
          terns have changed, such that what was once working for us no longer has
          the same potential. In that event, our hang-it-up feeling is alerting us that
          maybe, temporarily, we should hang it up and instead focus our efforts
