P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                 203


          published interviews with successful traders, such as found in the Market
          Wizards series, is that you can learn from the experience of others. When
          you actually observe this experience in real time, however, the contingen-
          cies are much more immediate and powerful. How a trader in the hole pulls
          himself out, or how a trader adapts to a changing market, or how a trader
          successfully prepares for a market day—all provide models for your own
          behavior. You learn, not just from their actions, but also from observing
          the results of their actions.
               Once you enter a social network of capable and motivated peers, the
          praise and encouragement of the group become powerful reinforcers. Most
          of us want to be respected by our fellow professionals, and the support of
          valued peers can be a meaningful reward. This reinforcer occurs among
          children, who find that they are praised by teachers, parents, and peers for
          good behavior and not praised when they behave badly. Over time, this
          differential reinforcement creates associative links for the child, so that
          he will do the right things even if no immediate praise is available. Sim-
          ilarly, young, developing traders will absorb the praise of mentors like a
          sponge; this helps them associate the right trading behaviors with favor-
          able outcomes. When you share successes with fellow professionals, you
          turn social interaction into social learning.


              Find experienced traders who will not be shy in telling you when
              you are making mistakes. In their lessons, you will learn to teach
              yourself.


               For this lesson, I encourage you to locate online networks of traders
          (or assemble one of your own) in which there is openness about trading
          successes and failures. Online forums are a possible venue; you can also
          connect with readers of trading-oriented blogs who participate in discus-
          sions. Or perhaps you will choose to write your own blog, openly sharing
          your trading experiences and attracting like-minded peers. When you net-
          work with traders who have similar levels of motivation, commitment, and
          ability (as well as compatible trading styles and markets), you can estab-
          lish a framework in which learning follows from shared ideas and experi-
          ences. We’ve seen in Chapter 5 how relationships can be powerful agents of
          change. In the behavioral sense, you want to be part of the learning curves
          of other traders, so that you can absorb their lessons. A great start is to es-
          tablish such a mutual learning framework with just one other compatible
          trader. Their emotional learning experiences become yours; yours become
          theirs. Their victories spur your ability to do the right things; your accom-
          plishments show them the path to success. This effectively doubles your
          behavioral learning, supercharging your self-coaching efforts.
