P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          6                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          the screen; watch yourself tracking the market, your day’s trading ideas at
          your side. Then turn your goal for the day into part of your visualization:
          imagine yourself performing the actions that concretely put that goal into
          practice. If your goal is to control your position sizing, vividly imagine your-
          self entering orders at the proper size; if your goal is to enter long positions
          only after a pullback, imagine yourself patiently waiting for the pullback
          and then executing the trade. As you visualize yourself realizing your goal,
          recall the feeling of pride that comes from realizing one of your objectives.
          Bask in the glow of living up to one of your ideals. Let yourself feel proud
          of what you’ve accomplished.
               It’s important not just to have goals, but also to directly experience
          yourself as capable of reaching those goals. Psychologists call that self-
          efficacy. You are most likely to experience yourself as a success if you
          see yourself as successful and feel the joys of success. You don’t need to
          imagine yourself making oodles of money; that’s not realistic as a daily
          goal. But you can immerse yourself in images of reaching the goals of good
          trading and experience the feelings of self-control, mastery, and pride that
          come from enacting the best within you.


              We are most likely to make and sustain changes when we perceive
              ourselves as efficacious: capable of making those changes.


               Many traders only get to the point of self-coaching after they have ex-
          perienced harrowing losses. The reason is similar to my experience with
          my diagnosis: it was the vivid fear of consequences—the intense feeling of
          not wanting to ruin my life—that drove my dietary change. Similarly, after
          traders lost a good deal of their capital, they never want to experience that
          again. They trade well, not because they talk themselves into discipline,
          but because they feel the emotional force of discipline’s absence.
               Contrary to the teachings of proponents of positive thinking, fear has
          its uses. Many an alcoholic maintains sobriety because of the fear of
          returning to the pain of drinking’s consequences. Emotion sustains the
          change.
               With guided imagery that you feel as well as see, you can create power-
          ful emotional experiences—and catalyze change—every single day. That’s
          when you become a change agent: one who sustains a process of transfor-
          mation. The key is adding emotional force to your goals. Your assignment
          is to take those lifeless goals off the piece of paper in your journal and turn
          them into vivid, powerful movies that fill your mind. Try it with one goal,
          one movie in your head, before you start trading. It is not enough to set
          goals; you must feel them to live them.
