P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          232                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r How much can you expect to make per trade? Per month? Per year?
              What is the likely variability of your income? Will this be manageable?

              These questions require hard data based on experience, not guesses or
          hopes.
              Before you attempt to trade for a living, you should have a sufficient
          base of experience to tell you four things:
            r What is the average size of my winning trade?
            r What is the average ratio of my winning trades to losing trades?
            r What is my average percentage of winning versus losing trades?
            r What is my average variability (volatility) of returns per day, week, and
              month?

              The answers to these questions will determine the likely path of your
          returns: the income generated from your trading business. These questions
          lead you to ask other questions:
            r What kind of trader am I: do I tend to make money by being right more
              often than wrong, by having larger winning trades than losers, or a
              combination of the two?
            r How much variation in my winning percentage and in the ratio of the
              size of winners versus losers is normal for me?
            r How large would my trading need to be to generate acceptable returns
              and how much capital would I need to support that trading without
              undergoing drastic swings?

               It is surprising—and dismaying—how few traders really look under
          the hood of their trading to understand how they make money. Because
          traders don’t have a grasp on how they perform on average and how much
          variation from average can be expected, they are poorly equipped to dis-
          tinguish normal drawdowns from troublesome slumps. They are also in a
          poor position to identify those occasions when the patterns of their returns
          shift due to changing markets.

              If your trading experience does not extend to a variety of market
              cycles and conditions, your trading business will be ill prepared to
              weather shifts in volatility and trend.

              Your assignment for this lesson is to go to Henry Carstens’ Vertical
          Solutions site (www.verticalsolutions.com/tools.html) and check out his
          two forecaster tools, using your own trading data as inputs. His first
          tool will show you how the path of your returns will vary as a function
          of changes in volatility. These volatility shifts could be attributable to
