P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                           181


              Let’s say a trader misses a good trade and then tells herself, “I can’t
          believe I missed that trade. What is wrong with me? I wait all week for the
          right setup and get it handed to me on a silver platter and I don’t take ad-
          vantage of it. I’m never going to make it if I keep making mistakes like this.”
              Many traders actually consider such self-talk to be constructive.
          Traders think that being hard on themselves will help them avoid simi-
          lar mistakes in the future. Suppose, however, we reframe the very same
          conversation as a dialogue from a friend to the trader:
              “I can’t believe you missed that trade. What is wrong with you? You
          wait all week for the right setup and get it handed to you on a silver platter
          and you don’t take advantage of it. You’re never going to make it if you
          keep making mistakes like this.”
              Clearly, when the dialogue is framed in such a manner we can appre-
          ciate that the tone is not at all constructive. Indeed, no true friend would
          ever talk to us in such a manner. The message is blaming and hostile, with
          no empathy or suggestions for improvement. Reframing the self-talk as an
          actual dialogue reveals the true emotion behind the automatic thoughts.

              Reframing thoughts as dialogues helps us view our thinking in a
              new light.


               Such reframing is particularly effective if we imagine ourselves speak-
          ing to a good friend in such a manner. For instance, suppose a good friend
          of yours went through a series of losing trades and you were to say to that
          friend, “I can’t believe you missed that trade. What’s wrong with you?” We
          can be hard on ourselves and buy into all sorts of hostile ways of talking
          to ourselves, but if we imagine delivering those same messages to a friend,
          we don’t buy into the scripts at all. When we reframe our thoughts as inter-
          actions with a friend, we draw upon personal strengths such as our ability
          to be supportive of others. Such strengths make it impossible to maintain
          a stance of angry blaming.
               As your own trading coach, you want to maintain a consistent and
          constructive tone of voice with yourself, so that you don’t damage your
          concentration or your motivation. An excellent exercise for working on
          this process is to close your eyes and imagine yourself as another trader
          that you are responsible for: perhaps an assistant or a student trader. Imag-
          ine that this valued assistant of yours has just made the same mistakes
          in the market that you’ve made. How would you talk with this person?
          What would you say? What would be your tone of voice? What emotions
          would you convey? Imagine these in as vivid detail as possible. Then note
          how your approach to this other trader differs from your own self-talk. If
          you wouldn’t talk to a valued colleague in the way that you’re addressing
