P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          126                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Your assignment is to embed concentrated learning into your sched-
          ule by allocating time for daily rehearsal of new skills and patterns. An
          excellent goal is to generate two day’s worth of learning experience into
          every day by rehearsing new patterns outside of trading hours as well
          as during them. Replay market days, either in video mode or through a
          simulation platform that has a replay feature, to accomplish this goal.
               I know from the traffic statistics on my blog and others that traders
          spend less time gathering market information after the close of trading and
          especially during weekends and holidays. Traders use the hours outside of
          trading to get away from markets. No one argues with the need for and de-
          sirability of life balance, but a nine-to-five approach will work no better in
          trading than it would in running a business or building a career as an artist,
          scientist, or athlete. When you read about elite performers in any field, one
          fact stands out: they are not the clock punchers. They are absorbed in their
          interests and, as a result, learn far more than others. They develop new
          skills and competencies far more readily than their peers simply because
          they multiply experience.

              Many traders back away from the screen when they have trad-
              ing problems, thereby reducing their experience. During the worst
              drawdowns, you want to minimize your trading and risk exposure,
              but maximize your work on markets.

               When you create safe environments for changing yourself and your
          trading, you mimic the learning behaviors of the greats, from concert
          pianists to chess champions to Olympic athletes. When you start with prac-
          tice that encourages errors and learning from them, development becomes
          a joy, not a burden. This is self-coaching at its finest.


                     COACHING CUE

          The video recording of markets for later review is an excellent way to multiply
          experience. Replaying the market day allows you to watch patterns unfold again
          and again under diﬀerent market conditions. Reviewing market moves that you
          missed sensitizes you to future occasions of opportunity.



          LESSON 40: USE IMAGERY TO
          ADVANCE THE CHANGE PROCESS

          The previous two lessons have emphasized the importance of repetition in
          cementing new ways of behaving and unlearning old patterns. By creating
          new opportunities to rehearse fresh skills, insights, and behavior patterns
