P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                        47

          with the next price movements. When we are pressing, we are trying to
          lead the markets, and that has the potential to turn normal losses and flat
          periods into veritable slumps.
                So how do we make trading rules automatic? As with the tooth brush-
          ing, it is through repetition. By repeating your rules many times, in many
          ways, you gradually internalize them and turn them into habits. You will
          still experience the normal stresses of markets—no one can repeal risk and
          uncertainty—but you will be so grounded in your decision-making that you
          cannot fall prey to distress.
                When you coach yourself, you can create opportunities for repetition
          before and during the trading day. This is a several step process:

           1. Make a list of your most important trading rules. These rules
              should include, at minimum, your rules for risk management; taking
              breaks after large or multiple trading losses; entering at defined sig-
              nal points; and preparing for the market day. You can’t expect to
              internalize trading rules if you haven’t first made them explicit.
           2. Create a routine before trading begins to review the rules. Men-
              tal rehearsals are powerful vehicles for creating repetition. Every one
              of your trading rules can be captured as a visualized scenario that you
              walk yourself through mentally while you keep yourself calm and fo-
              cused. You actually visualize yourself in different trading situations
              reminding yourself of rules and following those rules. The more ex-
              tended and detailed the visualizations, the more likely it is that you’ll
              internalize them as realistic experience.


              The more you think about rules and rehearse them, the more they
              become part of you. Repetition creates internalization.


           3. Create a break in your trading day to review your rule-
              following. Midday break, when markets tend to slow down, is a per-
              fect time to clear out your head, assess your trading to that point, and
              remind yourself of what you need to do in the afternoon. By turning
              your list of rules into a checklist, you can simply check yes or no for
              each rule depending on whether you followed it during the morning. If
              you did not follow a particular rule, you jot down that rule on a sepa-
              rate piece of paper, tape it to the monitor, and make it an explicit focus
              for the afternoon trade.
           4. Use the rules at the end of the day as a report card. An end-of-
              day review will tell you how well you performed in your preparation
              for trading, your entries, your risk management, and your exiting of
