P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          281


          Charles’s key insight is that the ideas in his book must be organized to
          be maximally useful. By placing his journal in a database format, he is able,
          with a few keystrokes, to access relevant experience from a broad time pe-
          riod. Journals can become unwieldy over time, and it is difficult to pull ma-
          terial from past entries. Increasing his access to his experience has enabled
          Charles to keep the past relevant to the present as a source of learning.
               When I asked Jason Goepfert to share his three greatest sources of
          self-coaching, he started with an idea similar to Charles Kirk’s.

              Write Down Every Idea
              “I’ve written close to 5,000 comments publicly over the past six years,”
              Jason explains, “and also keep a personal journal that tracks more soft
              subjects such as how I’m feeling, anecdotal evidence, clips of headlines
              on news sites, etc. I review all of these periodically and find that they
              are exceptional tools in several respects. They keep me honest (not
              getting too ahead of myself when trading well and not too down when
              not), and they also serve as a check for when I’m anxious about a trade.
              I’ve looked at how I felt right before putting on past winning trades
              and saw that I was anxious then, too, so what I’m feeling now isn’t
              necessarily some sixth sense subconsciously hinting that I not put on
              a trade.”

              Talking to More Accomplished and Experienced Traders
              Jason notes that he meets many successful traders through his mar-
              ket service. “I am always struck that most of them suffer through the
              same travails as the rest of us,” he points out. “They all get emotional
              at times, but they never let that seep into their risk control discipline.
              And that discipline is constant—there is no deviation from the strict
              principle that no one trade will sink them or their career. That is some-
              thing I have written down in front of me. Risk control is paramount,
              and it is something I use as a mantra.


              It’s okay to be emotional; it’s not okay to let emotions change your
              management of risk.


              Always Learning New Things
              “It’s a cliché,” Jason acknowledges, “but I’ve found that the more I
              learn, the more I discover how little I know. That helps tremendously
              in trading, as it has helped me to find new ways to approach old prob-
              lems. Market dynamics are always changing, so we need to find ways
