P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          180                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Reframing can often take a negative motivation and turn it positive. For
          a while, it seemed to me that my daughter was lazy in getting her school-
          work completed. I then hit on the idea that her primary motivations are
          social in nature: she’s a real people-person. I proposed that we do home-
          work together, and she readily rose to the occasion. This became a father-
          daughter tradition during the school year and a valued bonding experience.
          Similarly, when my son angrily confronted a teacher at school who “got in
          my face” about getting work done quickly, I started my conversation with
          him by congratulating him for using words only and not storming out of
          the class or laying hands on the teacher. Instead of framing the discipline
          problem as a failure experience, I reinforced the important lessons of self-
          control. He was much more able to hear my later advice, and he left the
          incident feeling better about himself, having learned from the confronta-
          tion. The most negative thought patterns are there for a reason; identi-
          fying that positive reason and finding new ways to accomplish it makes
          self-coaching empowering.
               Consider, for example, the example of the trader who becomes lost in
          hope during a losing trade. Instead of flaying him for a lack of discipline,
          I will emphasize that he has found a valuable market indicator: the Hope-
          Meter. When hope enters the picture during a trade, it’s a sign that deep
          down we know the trade is ill fated. By following the Hope-Meter, we can
          use the automatic thinking pattern to aid good trading, rather than interfere
          with it.


              When you see problems in new ways, you gain the ability to
              respond in new ways. Novelty is a central element in all change
              efforts.

               Many problems have a cyclical nature: I am afraid of losing money, so
          I set my stops too tight, lose more money on choppy action, and generate
          even more fear of losing money. When we reframe a problem, the new per-
          spective can help us break the cycle. If I reframe the problem as one of
          position sizing, I can take the same monetary risk with wider stops, break-
          ing the cycle of loss in choppy markets. How we view our patterns very
          much determines how we respond to them.
               A useful exercise that I described in The Psychology of Trading is to
          reframe our inner dialogues by viewing them as actual dialogues. What we
          say to ourselves sounds very different when we imagine the same words
          spoken by someone else. This is particularly true when we are hard on our-
          selves after losses. What feels like worry when we are absorbed in our own
          thoughts sounds more like hostility when we reframe the same messages
          as part of an interpersonal dialogue.
