P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               247

          sectors. The risk for the day trader is getting caught up in fixed opinions
          about the market, biasing trades in a single direction. If the day trader is
          diversified, the correlations among returns from his different setups and
          the serial correlations of returns among trades (and among returns across
          times of day) should be relatively modest over time. Each trade or type of
          trade for the day trader should, in a sense, be a separate product in the
          business mix.


              You don’t have to diversify by trading many markets. You can di-
              versify by time frame (longer-term, shorter-term), directionality
              (long, short), and setup pattern (trending, reversal).


               Is your trading business adequately diversified? Is its diversification
          expanding or narrowing? If you’re like most traders, you don’t know
          the answers to these questions. The data, however, can be at your fin-
          gertips. All you need is to divide your trades by strategy, track the re-
          sults of each strategy daily, and enter the information into Excel. From
          there, it’s simple to calculate correlations over varying time periods. And
          if you don’t trade every day and hold most positions for days? No prob-
          lem: simply calculate the returns of each strategy as if you had sold
          all positions at the end of each trading day. That will tell you if your
          trades are moving in unison or independently. And that will tell you if
          you have many profit centers supporting your business or only a very
          limited few.


                      COACHING CUE

          It is not too diﬃcult to turn good directional ideas into good pairs trades. Once
          you determine that an index, sector, commodity, or stock is going to go up
          or down, ask yourself what related indexes, sectors, commodities, or stocks
          are most likely to maximize this move. You would then buy the instrument
          most likely to maximize the move and sell the related one that is likely to lag.
          For instance, you might think the S&P 500 Index is headed higher. You note
          strength in the NYSE TICK ($TICK) relative to the Dow TICK ($TICKI) and so buy
          the Russell 2000 small caps and sell the Dow Jones Industrials in equal dollar
          amounts. This gives you an idea that can be proﬁtable even if your original idea
          about directionality in the S&P Index doesn’t work out. As long as there’s more
          buying in the broad market than among the large caps in relative terms, you’ll
          make money. Learn to think and trade in terms of relationships so you increase
          your arsenal of ideas.
