P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                         7


                      COACHING CUE

          To each of your goals, add an or else scenario. Vividly imagine the consequences
          of not sustaining your change. Relive in detail speciﬁc failure experiences that
          resulted from the faulty behavior you want to change. When you add an or else
          condition to your goal setting, you turn fear into motivation. The brain is wired
          to respond ﬁrst and foremost to danger; you will not gravitate toward the wrong
          behaviors if you’re emotionally connected to their danger. To this day, my diet
          is ﬁrmly in place. Fear has become my friend.




          LESSON 2: PSYCHOLOGICAL VISIBILITY
          AND YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH YOUR
          TRADING COACH

          If you are to be your own trading coach and guide your trading develop-
          ment, we have to make you the best coach you can possibly be. That means
          understanding what makes coaching work—and what will make it work
          for you.
               Research informs us that the most important ingredient in psy-
          chological change is the quality of the relationship between the helper
          and the person receiving help. Techniques are important, but ultimately
          those techniques are channeled through a human relationship. Studies find
          that in successful counseling, helpers are experienced as warm, caring,
          and supportive. When helpers are seen as hostile or disinterested, change
          processes go nowhere. There’s a good reason for this: relationships pos-
          sess magic.
               The magic of relationships is that they provide us with our most imme-
          diate experiences of visibility. I recently took a phone call from a reader of
          the TraderFeed blog. Many readers have provided valuable feedback about
          the blog, but this caller went far beyond that. He read every single post and
          then explained to me why he was drawn to the site. He put into words the
          very values that have led me to publish some 1,800 posts in the space of less
          than three years: the vision that, in cultivating our trading, we develop
          ourselves in ways that ripple throughout our lives.
               At the end of that conversation, I felt understood: I was visible to an-
          other human being. When my mother died, I kept my composure until I ap-
          proached her gravesite; then I lost it. My two children instinctively reached
          out to comfort me. It’s something I would have done for another person in
          that situation. At that moment, I saw a bit of myself in my children. Once
          again, I was visible.
