P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      29


          LESSON 10: FIVE BEST PRACTICES FOR
          EFFECTING AND SUSTAINING CHANGE

          The first two years of my career as a psychologist, I worked in a community
          mental health center, helping individuals, couples, and families with the full
          array of emotional disorders, from depression to drug abuse. The follow-
          ing year I shifted my practice to student counseling at Cornell University,
          which afforded my first opportunity to work with a relatively healthy pop-
          ulation dealing with normal, developmental issues. I then took the commu-
          nity and student experiences to Upstate Medical University in Syracuse,
          New York, where I coordinated the counseling and therapy for medical,
          nursing, and other health sciences students and professionals for 19 years.
          It was in this latter setting that I learned to apply brief therapy methods to
          the challenges of young people who were in high-stress, high-achievement
          occupations. That experience would prove invaluable to my work with
          traders in the financial markets.
               During my time in Syracuse, I met on average about 150 students a year
          for about eight sessions each. Multiply that times 19 and you have a sense
          for the changes I’ve seen happen and not happen. The shining successes,
          the disappointing failures: all stand out in my mind as if they occurred
          last week.
               When you’ve worked with that many people over the course of a ca-
          reer, you develop a good sense for change processes and what makes them
          click or stall. It doesn’t matter if you’re working with a victim of abuse in
          the community, a student with test anxiety at an Ivy League school, or a
          medical student dealing with the first loss of a patient. Change has a par-
          ticular structure and sequence; there are factors that speed it up and those
          that impede it. Below I share five of the most important change elements
          that affect my work as a trading coach. When you harness those elements,
          you will be well positioned to succeed in your self-coaching:

           1. Timing and Readiness. Timing is everything, in psychology as in trad-
              ing. The research of Prochaska and DiClemente suggests that people
              are most likely to make changes when they’re ready to make changes.
              Many times we’re conflicted about change; we’re not really sure that
              we want to abandon old ways. I talked with a trader recently who
              lost much more money than he should have (and than his plan called
              for) because he simultaneously traded three positions with full size
              when those positions were highly correlated. He was wrong and he
              blew out. But when we reviewed the unit sizing by trade idea rather
              than simply by position, it was clear that he wasn’t sure he wanted
              to make smaller bets. He was upset because he was wrong on the
