P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          178                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          (Now I take a break from the screen and douse my face in cold water when
          I need to shift how I’m thinking about markets. The physical jolt seems to
          facilitate a cognitive shift.)

              When the thought-stopping is dramatic, the mind-shift can be
              equally radical.

               Some traders I’ve worked with have found it useful to post signs on
          their computer monitors to remind themselves of the thoughts they most
          want to stop. Stay Humble is one sign a trader wrote after identifying a pat-
          tern of overconfident, arrogant thinking. Such signs help traders to think
          about their thinking, standing apart from the patterns that would normally
          trigger negative emotions and poor trading decisions. They also remind
          traders to periodically stop, interrupt automatic thought patterns, and reen-
          gage markets constructively. You can’t be absorbed in a pattern of thinking
          if you’re making yourself its observer.
               Here is a simple thought-stopping exercise that I have found useful in
          my own trading. The idea is to be on the lookout for any thoughts during
          trading that include the words I or me. The goal is to interrupt and dis-
          rupt those thoughts. The reason for this is that you don’t want to be self-
          focused when you’re concentrating on markets. You neither want to be
          thinking overly positively about yourself and your performance or overly
          negatively. When your automatic thinking turns attention inward, that’s the
          cue to immediately disrupt the pattern and become more market focused.
               There are many examples of self-directed attention that divide your
          focus from markets. These include:
            r “I’m doing great; this is the time to be aggressive.”
            r “I can’t believe how badly I’m trading.”
            r “Why did I just do that?”
            r “The market is killing me.”
            r “I’m going to make my money back.”
            r “Everything I do is wrong.”
            r “I hate this market.”
              Once the words I or me appear, you want to quickly close your eyes,
          take a deep breath, relax your muscles, and turn your attention to the mar-
          kets. If you’re already worked up to that point, a quick break from the
          screen—clearing your head and turning your attention elsewhere—can be
          useful.

              I find it helpful, during trading, to periodically remind myself, “It’s
              not about me.”
