P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          18                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          messages and experiences of the past. That is how abused children find
          themselves in abusive relationships; how insecure people land in insecure
          marriages.
              While relationships may be our most powerful psychological mirrors,
          given their emotional intensity and ongoing influence, they are far from the
          only determinants of self-image. The Devon Principle that I wrote about in
          the TraderFeed blog captures the understanding that everything we do is
          a psychological mirror. When my daughter Devon tackled work that she
          didn’t like, she found the work frustrating and felt inadequate as a result.
          When she pursued work that she loved so much that it didn’t feel like work,
          she felt fulfilled and gained confidence. The best work speaks to our in-
          terests and values, matching our abilities with challenges. Day after day,
          performing efficaciously at work that is important to us generates mirror-
          experiences of competence and worth. Conversely, when we’re performing
          meaningless work that doesn’t challenge our skills, it is difficult to feel any-
          thing other than boredom and meaninglessness. A large portion of career
          success consists of finding the right mirrors; it’s much easier to get to the
          top when you’re climbing the right ladders.


               For more on the Devon Principle, check out my blog: http://
               traderfeed.blogspot.com/2006/12/devon-principle.html

               For my work as a psychologist, nothing is a more powerful mirror than
          having a meaningful, positive impact upon people’s lives, particularly when
          I get to know those people well and care about them. I enjoy giving a talk
          for a large audience or writing an article that’s widely read, but the real
          joy is hearing back from someone who thought the ideas were of genuine
          value. And, to be honest, I find far more reward in helping a single person
          in counseling or coaching than in giving a keynote address for a large con-
          ference. When a person transforms her life via coaching or counseling, a
          mirror is created that validates and enhances both participants in the help-
          ing relationship. I have been most successful when I’ve immersed myself in
          these positive mirroring experiences, least successful when I have pursued
          activities that, ultimately, offer a limited sense of self.
               When you serve as your own coach, your challenge is to structure your
          learning and development so that trading itself becomes an experience that
          mirrors your growing confidence and competence. Many traders limit their
          self-coaching to keeping a journal, and then limit their journaling to re-
          counting all the things they’ve done wrong. As a result, self-coaching be-
          comes little more than self-criticism. What is mirrored to a trader when the
          journal focus is so negative? What would be mirrored if we hired a teacher
          or coach who only offered criticism? Over time, such coaching would fail,
          reinforcing a sense of incompetence and failure.
