P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              229


          After all, if traders can’t succeed in simulated trading, there’s no way they’ll
          succeed when those psychological pressures are added to the mix!
               What makes sense, therefore, is to require yourself to earn consistent
          money in practice trading before you assume modest risk with 100 shares
          (or one lot of a futures contract). You thus need to sustain success with
          that small size before you trade larger. Just as a business should sustain
          success with one store before opening other outlets, a trader should have
          to earn his way toward trading size. If beginning traders stick to this one
          self-coaching rule, many could stay in the game long enough to become
          experienced traders.



              A great business rule: Make yourself earn increases in trading
              size/risk by trading well and consistently with smaller size/risk.



               When the aim is trading for a living, far more startup capital is required.
          At the money management firms I currently work with, for example, a port-
          folio manager is quite a star if she can sustain 30 percent returns year after
          year without taking undue risk. That portfolio manager will inevitably be
          given more capital to manage and, if success follows, may even strike out
          on her own with her own fund. In truth, a consistent 15 percent annual
          return, achieved with modest risk, will keep a portfolio manager well em-
          ployed at most firms. True, any particular trader may achieve outsized re-
          turns in a given year, especially if taking large risk. The question, however,
          is: What kinds of average returns are sustainable over time?
               A developing trader who expects to outperform seasoned money man-
          agers year after year substitutes fantasies for business plans. But if con-
          sistent 30 percent returns after expenses are stellar, how much trading
          capital would be required to sustain a living—and to keep the trading ac-
          count growing at the same time? It’s not difficult to see that an account well
          into the six figures would be a minimum startup for a trader that wanted a
          good living from his work.
               Not many traders early in their careers have access to that kind of liq-
          uid capital. As a result, they start with much less capital and try to trade
          it aggressively to generate returns large enough to support a household.
          For a while, that might work out. Eventually, however, such traders sus-
          tain grievous losses that cannot be surmounted. After all, once you lose
          50 percent of your capital, you have to double your remaining money just to
          get back to where you were. An undercapitalized trader, like an undercap-
          italized business, can’t weather many adverse events—especially if taking
          large and frequent risks.
