P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                        153


          LESSON 48: MASTER TRANSFERENCE

          When I was in graduate school, I entered psychoanalytic therapy during
          my internship year in New York. The therapist’s office was in his home
          in a typical Manhattan high rise. Many of the issues I wanted to work on
          pertained to rebellion against authority, a pattern that appeared in various
          work and school settings. I generally tried to please those who supervised
          me. If I couldn’t win their approval, I became quite rebellious. I particularly
          did not like the feeling of being controlled by others. If there was a hint of
          coercion in a working relationship, I pushed back—sometimes quite hard.
              When I arrived at my therapist’s office, I noticed that the keys had
          been left in the door. I pocketed the keys, knocked on the door, met my
          therapist, and began the session. A few minutes into the session, the ther-
          apist’s wife—mortified to interrupt our session—entered the office to ask
          her husband if he had the house keys. I reached into my pocket, smiled at
          her, and handed them over with a wink. Not a bad start for a first session.
              Well, you don’t have to be a Freudian to have a field day with my ther-
          apy session, even apart from the sexual symbolism of the keys. I had the
          keys and I had control. When the wife needed something, I was the one to
          give it to her.
              To my therapist’s everlasting credit, he responded very well to the situ-
          ation, didn’t get defensive, but also didn’t ignore the matter. He encouraged
          me to join him in reflecting on what had happened and why it happened.
          That’s the psychodynamic way: you use your relationship as a medium for
          dealing with repeated conflicts from the past.
              What the therapist recognized, of course, was transference. Transfer-
          ence, in psychodynamic jargon, refers to the transferring of conflicts from
          the past to the present day. In other words, I was reacting to my therapist
          the way I might have reacted to my father or boss.
              Had the therapist become hostile and defensive (reactions he would
          have been entitled to, given that I had pocketed his keys!), I would have
          stayed in my rebellious stance. Indeed, such a reaction by the thera-
          pist would likely have fallen into the trap of confirming my worst fears
          about authority figures. By refusing to budge from his professionalism, he
          disconfirmed my expectations and took himself out of the authority role.
          That gave me the space to take a look at what I was doing in this and other
          relationships and why I was doing it. Eventually I came to recognize that
          my need to take control in relationships stemmed from weakness and fear,
          not from strength. I learned that I could achieve far better control by using
          my relationship skills to engage people constructively.

              The curative force in psychodynamic work is the use of the rela-
              tionship to create new, positive, powerful emotional experiences.
