P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          166                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              There are many automatic thoughts that affect traders as they struggle
          with risk and uncertainty. Some of these thoughts are:

            r “I need to make more money.”
            r “I’m so stupid; how could I have done that?”
            r “I’ve got this market licked.”
            r “I can’t afford to lose money.”
            r “The market is out to get me.”
            r “I’ve got to get my money back.”
            r “Nothing I do is right.”


               The first step toward becoming your own trading coach in a cognitive
          vein is to identify the thoughts that automatically appear during your
          trading. Several traders I’ve worked with have taken the unusual step of
          audio recording or videotaping themselves throughout the trading day and
          then reviewing the recording after the close of trading. It’s a great way to
          identify the recurring thoughts and feelings associated with trading chal-
          lenges. Many times, there are just one or two core automatic thoughts that
          dominate our experience. These are the thoughts that will form the initial
          focus of your coaching efforts.
               Your assignment is to observe yourself in trading with either video or
          audio recording, making notes of recurring thoughts and feelings. At first,
          don’t worry about changing these thoughts: simply observe how your mind
          is occasionally hijacked when events trigger particular schemas. It is cru-
          cial that you understand, from your own first-person experience, that you
          do not have complete freedom of will or mind. At times, all of us can be
          quite robotic, replaying thoughts that have become mere habits. By observ-
          ing these habitual thought patterns, you begin the process of separating
          yourself from them.



                     COACHING CUE

          Our most problematic automatic thoughts often come out when we’re fa-
          tigued and/or overwhelmed. Think back to times when you’ve felt overloaded
          with work, responsibilities, and market challenges. What are the thoughts that
          go through your mind? How do those thoughts aﬀect your feelings and be-
          havior? Observing yourself when you’re most psychologically vulnerable is a
          great way of clearly seeing the negative thought patterns and schemas that
          aﬀect us.
