P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008    13:12    Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 7



                          Learning New
                         Action Patterns
                              Behavioral Approaches to
                                   Self-Coaching



                    Without self-knowledge, without understanding the
                    working and functions of his machine, man cannot
                    be free, he cannot govern himself and he will always
                    remain a slave.
                                                         —G.I. Gurdjieff




                  ehavioral methods in psychology are the outgrowth of early research

         B        into animal learning, emphasizing the roles of conditioning and rein-
                  forcement in the unlearning and learning of action tendencies. Mod-
          ern cognitive-behavioral approaches to change treat thinking as a kind
          of behavior, making use of such methods as imagery and self-statements
          to modify our reactions to situations. Like the cognitive restructuring
          framework from Chapter 6, behavioral methods make extensive use of
          homework assignments in fostering change. The focus is on here-and-now
          skills-building, not explorations of past conflicts and their repetition in
          present-day relationships. Behavioral methods have been especially pow-
          erful in addressing anxiety problems, as well as issues of anger and frus-
          tration. In this chapter, we’ll explore behavioral techniques that you can
          master as part of your own self-coaching. You’ll find these techniques par-
          ticularly relevant to help you deal with performance pressures and impul-
          sive behavior.
               Because the essence of the behavioral approach is skills-building, you
          will benefit from these methods to the degree that you are a diligent stu-
          dent. Frequent practice of the techniques and application of skills to new
          situations is crucial in making the behavioral efforts stick. Pay particular
          attention to the exposure methods discussed later in the chapter and also

                                                                                     195
