P1: JYS
intro   JWBT039-Steenbarger     November 24, 2008      21:25     Printer: Yet to come




         2                                                                INTRODUCTION



         lack an appreciation of our personal assets. Each of us is a curious mix-
         ture of skills, talents, strengths, conflicts, and weaknesses. But just as a
         new business must capitalize on the strengths of its founders, a career in
         the markets crucially hinges on the assets—personal and monetary—of the
         trader. As a coach, my role is to take traders out of their psychological wa-
         ter and help them see what has been around them all along: the assets that
         can provide a lifetime of dividends.
               Never has self-coaching been more important for traders. As I write
         this, we have witnessed levels of market volatility unseen in the post-World
         War II period. Price volatility brings potential opportunity, but also risk.
         Traders who could not step back, recognize unfolding developments, and
         make adjustments have lost significant money. Those who have used the
         crisis to step out of the trading water, limit risk, and find fresh opportunity
         are the ones who are poised to reap those career dividends.
               The book you are reading is intended to be your companion in this trad-
         ing journey. It is organized in 101 lessons. Each lesson outlines a challenge
         and proposes a specific exercise for moving yourself forward with respect
         to that challenge. The lessons are intended as meditations to begin your
         trading day—coaching communications to help you enact the best within
         you. Eventually, as you read and live these lessons, the coaching commu-
         nications become your own self-talk. You begin by play-acting the book’s
         ideals and end up living them and shaping them into your own. You become
         your own trading psychologist.
               If reading a short passage each day and planting the right ideas into
         your forebrain helps you prioritize your life and trading goals—and if that
         in turn helps you make one less bad trade per week and take the one good
         one you would have otherwise missed—think of how you will personally
         and financially profit. But just as pills can’t work when they stay in a bottle,
         no one learns from an unopened book. The first step in becoming your own
         trading psychologist is to set time aside for self-mentorship—every day,
         every week—because that’s how behavior patterns turn into habits. The
         great individual is simply one who has made a habit of self-development.
               So there they are, staring at you from the shelf across the room: Your
         ideals, all those things you’ve wanted to do in life. You look longingly to-
         ward the shelf, but you can’t reach it from your comfortable chair. Yet you
         hold a book in your hands. Perhaps that book can make that chair just a
         little less comfortable, place the shelf just a bit closer.
               You turn the page.
               The next step is ours.
