P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          128                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              action. It is the realism of the imagery that enables the exercises to
              serve as substitutes for actual experience.
            r Dynamism—The imagery should be more like a detailed, realistic
              movie rather than a broad, static snapshot. If you read a newspaper
              description of a situation, your reaction isn’t as strong as it would be if
              you were to see the same situation dramatized in a movie. The dynamic
              nature of imagery is essential to its realism, which in turn is essen-
              tial to the inoculation process. Flat, unconvincing images won’t arouse
              our coping, and they surely won’t be effective approximations of real
              trading experience.
            r Elaboration—If I had to identify the most common shortcoming in
              people’s use of imagery as a change technique, it would be their ten-
              dency to cut the imagery work short. Longer, more elaborated expo-
              sures to imagined challenges are more effective than very brief ex-
              posures. Indeed, if the exposures are too brief, you may unwittingly
              reinforce the pattern of fleeing from stresses! The best practice is to
              imagine a situation from beginning to end in elaborate detail—and
              then repeat the scenario until it no longer evokes emotion. This prac-
              tice not only reinforces coping, but mastery and success.

              An interesting technique from the behavioral literature is flooding:
              prolonged exposure to imagined situations that are highly stress-
              ful. Traders learn to stay in control even during a flood of stressful
              imagery, so they prepare themselves for most anything the mar-
              kets throw at them.

            r Variation—Traders commonly imagine a challenge scenario, evoke
              the imagery, and then quickly move on to something else. As we’ve
              already seen, repetition cements learning. By failing to use the princi-
              ple of repetition in the area of imagery, traders open themselves to the
              risks of relapse. Once you evoke a detailed, realistic trading scenario
              and how you would handle it and once you repeat the scene to the
              point of mastery, you then want to create variations on the scenario.
              For instance, you might begin by imagining a frustration associated
              with a fast-moving market. If your goal were to learn new coping pat-
              terns during periods of frustration, you would master this first scenario
              and then create variations, such as frustrations associated with slow
              markets or not getting filled on orders. Vary the scenarios and you can
              generalize your learning and make it increasingly applicable to actual
              trading conditions.
            r Consistency—Any single imagery session will not affect behavior
              over days and weeks. It is the daily repetition of the sessions that
