P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                 123


               Similarly, if you are writing about your goal performance each day,
          the mere act of thinking about your new behaviors and evaluating them
          will serve as a kind of repetition. You’re much more likely to stick with
          new behaviors if they command top-of-the mind awareness. Talk about the
          changes you’re making, write about them, grade yourself daily on them
          and—most of all—enact them during each day’s trade. As with the driving,
          before too long you’ll find yourself doing the right things automatically. At
          that point, you don’t need motivation; you’ve turned goals into habits.

                      COACHING CUE

          Engage in an important goal-oriented pattern as your ﬁrst activity of the day to
          build momentum for a purposeful day. I’ve worked with traders who stuck with
          their trading goals much better after they began programs of physical ﬁtness.
          Their ﬁtness work forced them to be goal-oriented to start their day, which
          carried over into their trading. You’re not just training yourself to trade better;
          you’re training yourself to sustain change eﬀorts across all facets of life.




          LESSON 39: CREATE A SAFE
          ENVIRONMENT FOR CHANGE

          In the last lesson, we took a look at the importance of repetition in cement-
          ing new patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving. The single most com-
          mon reason why skilled traders fail to coach themselves to higher levels
          of performance is that they initiate changes, but fail to sustain them. As
          soon as they make improvements, they relax their efforts and fall back into
          old ways. A successful coach knows when the opponent is on the ropes
          and doesn’t let up. When you have a positive experience, you want it to be
          a motivation for further positive experiences, not a cue for complacence.
          The best coaching efforts develop a kind of momentum in that way, adding
          success to success and sustaining a sense of mastery and accomplishment.
               The problem with experience is that it takes time. Particularly if you’re
          a longer-time-frame trader, many weeks or months of trading may pass be-
          fore you have the opportunity to build a large base of new experience. If
          only you could multiply your experience, you could accelerate your learn-
          ing curve. Changes that would otherwise take months could be accom-
          plished in a few weeks.
               The way that coaches in sports and the performing arts multiply
          experience is through repeated practice. A team might only play oppo-
          nents on the weekend, but will practice every day to prepare for the games.
          Similarly, actors and actresses will rehearse their lines every day before
