P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                         277


              for me.” Time and again, I find that this is what winners do: they
              learn from their losses and adapt. Trading requires an active mindset;
              it’s a bit like patrolling enemy territory, where you have to be on the
              alert for surprises at all times. If you’re not prepared—and haven’t re-
              hearsed that preparation—you won’t be able to act on instinct when
              those surprises hit. Brian let down his guard, and he was surprised. He
              created a mental checklist and incorporated visualizations of what-if
              scenarios and sharpened his active focus, anticipated what could go
              wrong, and enhanced his results.

              Corey’s three best practices for self-coaching were: 1) find a trading
          partner/group; 2) think in terms of concepts; and 3) keep an idealized trade
          notebook. All three practices reflect the progression of his learning as a
          trader.

              Find a Trading Partner/Group
              “The first thing I learned when I began trading full-time,” Corey re-
              counts, “was that trading could be an extremely lonely, isolating ex-
              perience. It can be difficult to sustain motivation when you’re the only
              one who knows what you’re doing, and friends and family may not un-
              derstand what trading is all about. Trading can be quite difficult, and
              it is immensely helpful to have at least a handful of solid friends or
              colleagues who understand your strengths and weaknesses while sup-
              porting one another for mutual benefit, such that the whole is greater
              than its parts. I began writing the blog initially as a way to reach out
              to others who had similar experiences . . . That has made an ultimate
              difference in my trading, mostly from the interactions and idea-sharing
              with others, which has broadened my awareness . . . I also have one
              experienced trader locally with whom I meet almost every evening to
              discuss the day’s events and share ideas and study markets. This in-
              teraction has challenged us both, and we bring a combination of skills
              that benefit us academically (combined research), emotionally (moti-
              vation), and financially (improved trading tactics).”


              Form a team to make trading personally rewarding and stimulate
              ongoing learning.


              Think in Terms of Concepts
              “I think the largest shift in my performance came when I began
              to view markets and price behavior conceptually, rather than being
