P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          60                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          in, that harmony manifests itself in positive emotional experience. When
          our environments frustrate our needs, interests, and values, the result is
          distress. Negative emotions, in this context, are very useful: they alert us
          to potential mismatches between who we are and what we’re doing.
               When you are your own trading coach, your job is to keep yourself
          within your niche, swinging at pitches that fall within your sweet spots and
          laying off those that yield marginal results. This means knowing when to
          not place trades, not to participate in markets. Equally important, it means
          knowing when your advantage is present and making the most of opportu-
          nities. A common pattern among active traders is that they will trade too
          much outside their frameworks, lose money, and then lack the boldness to
          press their advantage when they find genuine sweet spots. It’s easy to see
          careers lost by blowing up; less visible are the failures that result from the
          inability to capitalize on real opportunity.
               I recently talked with a day trader who was convinced that he would
          make significant money if he just held positions for several days at a time.
          Though it looked easy to find spots on charts where such holding periods
          would have worked, in real time that trade was much more difficult. It was
          not in the trader’s wheelhouse; it was outside his niche. Calibrated to mea-
          sure opportunity and risk on a day time frame, he found himself shaken out
          by countertrend moves when he tried holding positions longer. Worse still,
          he mixed his time frames and tried to convert some losing day trades into
          longer-term holds. Outside his niche, he began trading like a rookie—with
          rookie results.
               What is your wheelhouse? What do you do best in markets? If you
          could trade just one strategy, one instrument, one time frame, what would
          these be? Do you really know the answers to these questions: have you
          truly taken an inventory of your past trades to see which work and which
          have been low and outside?
               There is nothing wrong with expanding your niche in a careful and
          thoughtful way, much as a company might test market new products in
          new categories. But just as management books tell us that great companies
          stick to their knitting and exploit core competencies, we need to capitalize
          on our strengths in our trading businesses. As we will see in Chapter 8, you
          are not just your own trading coach: you are the manager of your trading
          business. That means reviewing performance, allocating resources wisely,
          and adapting to shifting market conditions.


               The greatest problem with overtrading is that it takes us outside
               our niches—and therefore out of our performance zones.


             Here’s a simple exercise that can move you forward as the manager of
          your trading business. At the time you take each trade, simply label it as A,
