P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               121


          LESSON 38: RELAPSE AND REPETITION

          The greatest enemy of coaching is relapse. It is relatively easy to initiate
          change, but quite difficult to sustain it. Our old patterns are what come
          naturally: they’re what we’ve been doing day after day, year after year.
          Those patterns are overlearned; they have been repeated so often that they
          have become automatic. If change efforts are not sustained, the automatic
          patterns naturally fill the void.
              What this means in practice is that there is a certain series of stages to
          any change process:

              Phase One—We repeat old patterns automatically, experience conse-
              quences, and try to avoid the consequences as much as possible.
              Phase Two—Consequences of old patterns accumulate and we de-
              velop an awareness of the need to change, though we may not know
              how to change and may have ambivalent feelings about change.
              Phase Three—We can no longer accept the negative consequences
              of our old ways and commit ourselves to making changes by trying to
              think and act differently.
              Phase Four—We slide back into old patterns periodically when our
              change efforts lose momentum, creating oscillating periods of change
              and relapse.
              Phase Five—We engage in new patterns sufficiently often that they
              become automatic, greatly reducing the relapse into old ways.

               So let’s take a practical example: In phase one, we are in an unfulfilling
          romantic relationship, but minimize the problems and try to go on from
          day to day. In phase two, we recognize that the problems are there, but
          wrestle with the question of whether we really want to rock the boat and
          raise concerns with our partner. Phase three brings clear awareness of the
          need for change and discussions at home to work out problems. Phase four
          sees periods of good times, interrupted by resumptions of the problematic
          interactions, perhaps aided by couples counseling. In phase five, we keep
          working on the counseling exercises, changing patterns of communication,
          until there are new and more constructive ways of engaging each other that
          have become routine.
               This step-wise scheme suggests that relapse is not merely a problem,
          it is a step on the road to change. Few people change patterns all at once
          and for all time. More often, there is a tug-of-war between the old, over-
          learned patterns and the new, constructive ones we’re working on. This
          tug-of-war occurs precisely because the new patterns have not yet been
          overlearned: it takes conscious effort to enact them. Early in the change
          process, we don’t think about change; in the middle phases, we have to
