P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              245

          but the market may provide a number of breakout moves due to economic
          reports.


              Many traders think they are diversified, when in reality they are
              trading the same strategy or idea across multiple, related instru-
              ments. This means they’re taking much more risk than they realize.


               One stock market trader I worked with had a phenomenal track record
          and then stopped making money all of a sudden. On the surface, he was
          well diversified, trading many issues and utilizing options effectively for
          hedging and directional trade. When we reviewed his strategies in detail,
          however, it was clear that all of them relied on bull market trending to
          one degree or another. When the market first went into range-bound mode
          and then into a protracted bear move, he no longer made money. He was
          trading many things without much in the way of diversification. His trading
          business was like a car dealership that sells many kinds of trucks, vans, and
          SUVs. Once large vehicles go out of favor, perhaps due to high fuel costs,
          the business becomes vulnerable. It’s not as diversified as it looks.
               Suppose you track your performance historically and find that your
          strategies correlate at a level of 0.20. The outcome variance shared by the
          strategies would be the square of the correlation—0.04, or 4 percent. That
          means that results from one strategy only account for 4 percent of the vari-
          ation in the other strategy—not a high level. Imagine, however, that dur-
          ing the last month, the correlation soars to 0.70. Now the overlap between
          strategies is close to 50 percent. They are hardly independent.
               What could cause such a jump in correlation? In a strongly trending
          market, the breakouts might all be in one direction—the same direction as
          earnings surprises. Alternatively, you might get caught with an overall mar-
          ket opinion and select your trades to fit that opinion. In either case, your
          diversified business is no longer so diversified, just like the car dealership.


              Correlations among your strategies and trades vary over time
              because of how markets trade and because of your own hidden
              biases.

               That lack of diversification matters, because it means that your capi-
          tal is concentrated on fewer ideas. Your risk is higher, because instead of
          dividing your capital among two or more independent strategies, it is now
          concentrated in what is effectively a single strategy. The same problem oc-
          curs when different markets or asset classes begin trading in a more corre-
          lated fashion, perhaps due to panicky conditions among investors. During
