P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                  93


          to sit through a trade’s uncertainty as profits accumulate requires particu-
          lar confidence in the initial trade plan. Ironically, it takes more confidence
          to stay in the trade as it goes in your favor than if it remains in a narrow
          range, simply because more paper profits are at stake.


              It usually takes more confidence to sit in a winning trade than to
              enter it.

               So how does one achieve the level of confidence needed to sit through
          good trades? Often it’s not the loss of the paper profits per se that are the
          real threat for traders. After all, if a trade moves your way and you pru-
          dently raise your stop-loss level to breakeven, you’ll never get hurt by a
          sudden, unusual adverse excursion. As disappointing as it may be to lose a
          paper profit, it’s hardly, in itself, a threat to one’s account.
               Rather, the threat to traders lies in how they would process such a re-
          tracement. In many cases, their attitude would become quite negative in the
          face of lost profits. They might criticize themselves for the missed opportu-
          nity or lapse into an uncomfortable state of frustration. Instead of viewing
          the reversal of a gain as nothing lost—simply a scratched trade—they treat
          it as a situation calling for blame. It’s the self-blame and the discomfort of
          second-guessing that traders are avoiding, not the (paper) dollar loss itself.
          “You’re never wrong taking a profit,” is an attitude that speaks more to this
          psychological reality than to the logical necessity of taking larger winners
          than losers.


              Traders often think they’re managing a trade when they exit pre-
              maturely, when in fact they’re managing their thoughts and feel-
              ings about that trade.


               A large part of confidence is trust. You have confidence in your mar-
          riage because you trust your spouse. You have confidence in your driv-
          ing because you trust your ability to maneuver the car under changing
          road conditions. If you don’t act on your trade ideas—that is, by not see-
          ing them through to their planned conclusion—you actually undercut your
          confidence by never allowing yourself to develop trust in those ideas. Just
          as mistrust of a spouse cannot lead to security in a marriage, a failure to
          trust your time-tested ideas cannot bring confidence to your trading. You
          can only endure the uncertainty of the trade that moves in your favor by
          seeing—in your own experience—that the discomfort is indeed endurable,
          and that you gain far more than you lose by sticking with your planned
          trades.
