P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          302                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          spreadsheet applications, such as Excel, you’ll see in the lower right corner
          the summation of all those 1s. Dividing that result by the number of days
          in the sample reveals the at-any-time odds—57 percent. In other words, on
          any given day, the chances that the S&P will be higher two weeks later have
          been 57 percent. That is far less than the 83 percent odds when the S&P is
          higher three days after a 3:1 breadth session. This confirms the original hy-
          pothesis that the chances for a market rally over the intermediate-term are
          far better than average, meaning there’s a clearly bullish edge.
               “Instead of relying on traditional indicators, most of which merely ma-
          nipulate and regurgitate price action, look beneath the surface of the major
          averages at the market internals such as breadth, up/down volume, new
          highs/lows, NYSE TICK action, etc,” Rennie advises. “This is the area in
          which I’ve found the majority of trading setups that stand up to historical
          testing. Does a surge in new 52-week lows portend an intermediate-term
          bottom? Is a 90 percent up volume day bullish? How about a cluster of 80
          percent up volume days in a short time frame? Just about any concept you
          can imagine can be quickly researched and tested with the proper prepa-
          ration. By maintaining your own version of a master spreadsheet and con-
          ducting your own testing and research, you’ll know when a concept truly
          provides a bullish or bearish edge. Consistently exploit that edge, and you’ll
          have a leg up on the competition.”

              It is powerful when you find a pattern with an edge, but even more
              powerful when your edge is the ability to find and trade many such
              patterns.



          Intraday Analysis
          “The NYSE TICK is probably the single most helpful intraday indicator,”
          Rennie Yang asserts. “It tells you, at a glance, how many issues last traded
          on an uptick versus a downtick. A reading of +500, for instance, means
          that, at that moment, 500 more issues last traded on an uptick. When you
          first view a chart of the NYSE TICK, it will look as if it’s too noisy to be
          of any use . . . But change your viewpoint and you’ll see an entirely differ-
          ent picture . . . You can actually hide the NYSE TICK itself and just plot the
          20-period moving average of the TICK to gain considerable insight into the
          supply/demand equation. Is the average holding above zero, meaning gen-
          erally more buying power, or is the average holding below zero, reflecting
          better selling pressure? That’s something every day trader should know.
               “Here’s another technique for utilizing intraday TICK readings,” Ren-
          nie offers. “Many data feeds such as e-Signal allow you to export data in
          real time to a spreadsheet. Through a technology known as DDE (dynamic
