P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                              187

          column be detailed, so that you have an opportunity to really think about
          and absorb the alternative view. Writing, “I shouldn’t be so hard on myself,”
          is less effective than writing, “This is the same kind of talk I heard from the
          boss at my old job who couldn’t stand me. I hated him, and I hate how
          he treated me. I don’t deserve this and I’m not going to do it to myself.” It
          is also effective to elaborate the negative consequences of the automatic
          thinking in that fourth column: “This kind of thinking has interfered with
          my trading all year long. I’m not going to let it cost me any more money!”

              You want to counter your automatic thoughts with emotional
              force; it is the emotional experience of challenging your ways of
              thinking that will cement the new patterns.

               The reason the journal is effective is that it provides a regular, struc-
          tured opportunity for you to take the self-coaching role: it’s a great way
          to practice mentoring yourself. The use of the journal may feel artificial at
          first, but—with repeated entries—you’ll begin to internalize that coach’s
          voice and start challenging your negative thinking as soon as it pops up.
               The cognitive journal also offers an excellent tool for reviewing your
          trading, particularly if you add a simple fifth column and track your prof-
          itability each day and/or grade the quality of your trading for that day. That
          column enables you to see how your progress in changing your self-talk is
          related to your trading progress, adding to motivation. Another alteration
          to the framework is to create an audio journal, so that all of your entries
          are spoken out loud in real time. This not only helps you restructure your
          thinking during breaks in the trading day, it also provides a useful day’s end
          review and cements your lessons.


                      COACHING CUE

          Where traders often fall short with the cognitive journal is in making it more
          of a logical exercise than a psychological one. Traders challenge their negative
          thoughts in a calm, rational manner, but that doesn’t carry emotional force. The
          research literature in psychology suggests that we process emotional material
          more deeply than ordinary thoughts. You want to make your challenging of
          negative thought patterns into an emotional exercise where you vigorously re-
          ject the thinking that is holding you back. It helps to keep in mind that these are
          the thoughts and behaviors that have sabotaged your trading, cost you money,
          and threatened your success. If there was a person posing such a threat to you,
          you would surely confront him and reject his inﬂuence. When you personalize
          your automatic thoughts, you can create more powerful emotional experiences
          that aid the restructuring of your perception.
