P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          326                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          We would not assume that trends are our friends; nor would we be tempted
          to fade moves automatically. We would also know to look for potential
          edges elsewhere.


              Keep a record of the relationships that you examine and what you
              find; this will guide future inquiries and prevent you from duplicat-
              ing efforts later on.


               If your analysis does not identify a promising relationship within the
          data, you’re limited only by your own creativity in exploring alternate hy-
          potheses. For instance, you might look at how prior returns affect next
          returns for weekly or monthly data, rather than daily data. You might ex-
          plore next day returns for a different instrument or market. Perhaps you’ll
          see greater evidence of trendiness in commodities or small stocks than in
          the S&P 500 Index.
               Where your creativity can really kick in is in your selection of
          independent variables. The same basic spreadsheet format outlined above
          could be used to examine the relationship between the current day’s
          put-call ratio and the next day’s S&P 500 returns; the current day’s volume
          and next day returns; the current day’s financial sector performance and
          next day S&P 500 returns; the current day’s bond yield performance
          and next day returns. Once you have the spreadsheet analysis process
          mastered, it’s simply a matter of switching one set of variables for another.
          This way, you can investigate a host of candidate hypotheses in a relatively
          short period of time.
               The key to making this work is the Sort command in Excel. This sorts
          your independent variable from high to low or low to high so that you can
          see what happens in your dependent variable as a result. Along with visu-
          alizing data in charts, sorting is a great way to get a feel for how variables
          may be related, highlighting important market themes. But save your orig-
          inal spreadsheet with the formulas—the one you had titled Practice Sheet
          in the previous lesson. We’re not finished with Excel tricks!


                     COACHING CUE

          Here is one fruitful line of investigation: Take a look at next day returns as a
          function of weak up days versus strong up days. You can deﬁne weak versus
          strong with indicators such as the daily advance/decline ratio or the ratio of up
          volume to down volume. Limit your sort to the rising days in the sample and sort
          those based on market strength. What you’ll ﬁnd for some markets is that very
          strong markets tend to continue their strength in the near term; weaker rising
