P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               225

          me. Rather than experience the hurt and resentment that such a meeting
          would engender, I worry about making the meeting on time, what I’ll say
          in the meeting, what I might miss in the markets while the meeting is go-
          ing on, etc. None of these worries has the power to evoke strong emotion.
          Rather, the worries serve as distractions from the difficult feelings I would
          experience if I actually visualized outcomes of the meeting. If I avoid ex-
          periencing these feelings, worry serves as a negative reinforcer. Strange as
          it might seem, worry is not so noxious when the alternative is facing scary
          outcomes.
               Worry can possess reinforcement value in other ways, as well. If I were
          feeling out of control in my trading, that feeling would be unpleasant to
          dwell upon. If I worry about details in the work I’m going to have done
          on my house, I shift my focus to something more controllable. While it
          may seem that I worry about negative outcomes—and, in the example, I
          am—the psychological reality is that I substitute a lesser concern for a
          greater one when I worry. What we worry about is usually not what is
          scariest to us. Indeed, it is a diversion from the scariest scenario—and
          therein lies its reinforcement value.


              Worries about small things usually mask larger concerns.


               Exposure work can be a great antidote to worry. When we expose our-
          selves to our greatest concerns—our worst-case scenarios—we can plan
          for these possibilities and mentally rehearse positive coping. If, for in-
          stance, I’m threatened by an upcoming meeting with the risk manager at
          my firm, I’ll look at the worst case outcome—a large cut in my capital—and
          figure out a trading plan that will focus on my most successful trading
          and bring me back to my prior portfolio size. Once I anticipate the worst
          and figure out how I’d deal with it, I take the catastrophe out of the situa-
          tion. That eliminates the need for worry-based diversions. Worry thinking
          can’t be a negative reinforcer if it is more noxious than the alternative of
          facing possible outcomes constructively.
               A great way to coach yourself past worry is to make note whenever
          you catch yourself worrying and ask, “What am I really fearful of? What’s
          the real issue here?” What you generally find is that there’s an unresolved
          situation looming in the background. Until the situation is faced squarely,
          it intrudes in your work and affects your mood. Suppose you find yourself
          worrying about whether a specific trade will work out. When you stop and
          reflect, you realize that you’ve sized the trade and placed your stop-loss
          point in such a way as to make such worry unnecessary. So what is the
          real concern? Perhaps the fear is of one’s future as a trader. Perhaps it’s a
          conflict at home. Whatever the real problem is, you want to visualize the
