P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          296                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          environment. Larry and Reid have developed a web site and blog so
          that they can share their insights with the trading public (http://blog.
          tradingrm.com).
               It is typical of Mike that, when I asked him for the three things that
          most help his self-coaching, he emailed me a 14-page document. He is at-
          tuned to the mentoring process and practices it in his own trading. Number
          one on his list is keeping trading statistics. “Statistics are very important for
          my trading,” Mike explains. “I must know what trading plays are working
          best for me, what stocks I am trading profitably, my win rate, my liquidity
          stats, etc.”
               The head trader at SMB, Gilbert Mendez (GMan) created a tool for
          the desk called the SMB Chop Tracker. It summarizes trading statistics
          each day for each trader, so that they can see how well they’re doing and
          where their profits and losses are coming from. “Most often I struggle with
          my trading because I am in the wrong stocks,” Mike Bellafiore notes. He
          tells the story of how he traded one particular stock, MBI, quite well in the
          fall and then consistently lost money in it. “I felt like someone else was
          inhabiting my trading body,” he jokes. “So I looked at my stats. They were
          screaming, ‘Hey, Mike, maybe another stock for you?’ I figured out some
          adjustments I could make, concluded there were better stocks for me to
          trade, and decided to move on. I went right back to making money.”


              Statistics on our trading alerts us to hidden patterns, both prob-
              lems and solutions.

               Mike also tells about a particularly vicious loss he took in trading
          SNDK. “I will always remember 11/21/05,” he recalls. “What a bloodbath.
          For weeks I walked around cussing SNDK underneath my breath and
          swore to never trade it again. But one day I checked my statistics and sur-
          prisingly learned that I actually traded SNDK well, save that one day. I was
          overvaluing that last rip. While trading, you develop a perception of how
          well you are trading a stock. That perception can be incorrect. When you
          study your trading statistics, you may discover that the stocks you thought
          you were killing, you weren’t. And you may discover that the stocks you
          thought were a disaster weren’t.”
               Mike Bellafiore’s second coaching practice is something we all do, but
          not with intention: breathe. “While trading, it is essential to quiet your mind
          so that you accurately process the data that the market offers,” he ob-
          serves. “Some traders think they just need to focus better and shut out
          unneeded stimuli. These traders believe they can will themselves to focus
          better. But quieting your mind is an acquired skill. Mariano Rivera [a fast-
          ball pitcher] can’t just start throwing a changeup because he really wants
