P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          46                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          when odds are with you. In the latter frame of mind, you let the market
          come to you and wait for your opportunity. In the mindset of pressing, you
          want things to happen and you want it now.
               The irony of pressing is that it is often the most successful traders—
          those who are competitive and driven to succeed—that fall victim. They so
          hate losing that they’ll do anything to win—including trading poorly!
               Trading is a bit like flying a fighter plane or playing chess: it requires
          highly controlled aggression. In trading, the control element comes from
          knowing when markets present opportunity and when they don’t. One of
          the best ways of instilling this control is to trade with rules. These may
          be rules related to position sizing, stop-loss levels, when to enter markets
          and when to stay out, trading with trends, etc. When rules are repeated
          and followed over time, they are internalized and become mechanisms
          of self-control. We can observe this process among children. They so often
          hear rules about respect for elders or cleanliness that (eventually!) those
          behaviors become automatic.


               The right trading behaviors start as rules and evolve into habits.


               These automatic behaviors are important because they don’t require
          effort and a dedication of mental resources. If we have to make ourselves
          follow rules each time we confront situations, we will be taxed—and our
          full attention will not be on those situations. One of the great strengths
          of the human mind is its ability to automatize rules, so that mental and
          physical resources can be fully devoted to challenges at hand. This enables
          us to face those challenges under self-control (i.e., under rule governance).
               So how do we make our trading rules automatic? The answer is to turn
          them into habit patterns. At one time in our lives, “brush your teeth in the
          morning” might have been a rule that our parents had to impress on us.
          With repetition, it became habit; most of us need no reminder of the rule
          or special motivation to follow the rule. This is the kind of automaticity we
          aim for in trading: where our rules become so much a part of us that they
          require no special attention or effort.
               When we’re pressing to make money, the need to put on trades over-
          whelms our rule governance. Pressing normally occurs in situations in
          which we’re frustrated with our performance. Perhaps we’ve lost money,
          missed out on opportunities, or are just going through a period of flat eq-
          uity curve. The frustration leads us to try to create opportunities rather
          than respond to those presented by markets.
               In our dance with markets, we want the market to lead. When we
          attempt to lead the market—when we try to anticipate what may happen
          instead of identify what is happening—we’re most likely to be out of step
