P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          208                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               The tendency of markets to make extreme moves amid frequent mean
          reversion creates interesting and important psychological challenges that
          affect self-coaching. To fully appreciate this, we need to understand the
          dynamics of behavioral conditioning.
               Let’s say that, each time I ring a bell, I hit you over the head. Soon,
          you’ll learn to duck as soon as you hear the bell. That is a conditioned re-
          sponse. Days later, you might be in a different location and will still duck if
          the bell sounds. It’s automatic; not a behavior guided by explicit reasoning.
          You’ve learned to associate bell and pain, just as Pavlov’s dogs associated
          a ringing bell with the appearance of meat. Bell rings, dogs salivate. Bell
          rings, you protect yourself.
               Now let’s take our experiment a step further. I ring a similar but dif-
          ferent bell and once again hit you over the head. Before long, you learn to
          duck whenever you hear any bell. This is called generalization. Your con-
          ditioned responses (the ducking) have now extended to a class of stimuli
          similar to the original one.
               Much of what we call traumatic stress is the result of such condition-
          ing. In the Psychology of Trading book, I mentioned my car accident in
          which I was thrown from a vehicle while riding as a passenger. Just as a
          result of that single, powerful event, I developed an anxiety response any-
          time I subsequently sat in the passenger seat of a car—even when the ve-
          hicle wasn’t moving! I had learned an associative connection between be-
          ing a passenger and extreme danger; the conditioning stuck with me even
          though I intellectually knew it made no sense.


              Many of our extreme reactions to market events are the result of
              prior conditioning.


               Powerful positive emotional events can yield the same kind of condi-
          tioning. The high obtained from certain drugs can be so strong that some
          people will develop addictive patterns after a single use. Underlying the
          addiction is the learned connection between the high and the use of the
          substance. That, too, overrides reason and reorganizes behavior.
               One of my greatest failures as a trading coach occurred with a young
          trader who experienced early market success. He took the time to observe
          markets, learn short-term patterns, and track his own trading. He started
          trading small and learned the important lessons about waiting for good en-
          try points, cutting losing trades, and letting his winning trades run to their
          target points. The trading firm was happy with his progress and gave him
          significantly greater size to trade. That was where I went wrong. I should
          have stepped in and demanded that the trader’s increase in risk be more
          graduated. Instead, armed with his new size, the young trader decided he
          would try to compete with the more experienced traders at the firm. He
