P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                211


          LESSON 66: THE POWER
          OF INCOMPATIBILITY

          Earlier we saw how much of what we learn is state-dependent. We as-
          sociate particular outcomes with specific physical and emotional states.
          These associative links trigger unwanted behavior patterns when we enter
          those states. The classical conditioning mentioned in the previous lesson is
          an excellent example: if we experience overwhelming anxiety due to large
          losses, exiting the market may provide immediate relief. Subsequent expe-
          riences of anxiety in the market may trigger the same exiting behavior even
          when it would be in our financial interest to hold the position. The associa-
          tion between the anxiety and perceptions of danger may be so strong that
          it overwhelms our prior planning.
               Boredom, for many active traders, can be as noxious as strong anxiety.
          It may be associated with failure to make money, or it may have much
          earlier negative associations: being lonely or feeling abandoned as a child.
          If you get into a trade—particularly a risky one—you immediately relieve
          the boredom, but you create a new trading problem. In such cases, the
          trading behaviors triggered by the state are more psychological in their
          origins than logical.


              If trading is associated with an aversive state, we tend to do what
              is necessary to alleviate the state, even at the expense of our port-
              folios.

               One of the simplest behavioral techniques for breaking these bonds of
          conditioning is to place yourself in a state that is incompatible with the one
          that triggers your problematic trading. Thus, for instance, if you find that
          anxiety triggers hasty and ill-timed market exits, you would work on plac-
          ing yourself in a calm, relaxed physical condition that is incompatible with
          anxiety. If boredom were your nemesis, you would cultivate activities that
          hold your interest during slow markets. When I am fatigued, I find that a
          round of vigorous exercise not only makes me more alert, but also triggers
          positive action patterns, as I tackle work that had previously seemed over-
          whelming. If you’re not in a state that supports sound decision-making,
          your self-coaching focus turns from the markets to yourself and doing
          something different to shift your state.
               Two of the methods I have found particularly helpful in maintaining
          states incompatible with one’s triggers are controlling breathing and mus-
          cle tension during trading. When I focus on the screen and breathe deeply
          and slowly while I follow the market, I minimize the physical manifesta-
          tions of any form of overexcitement—from overconfidence to fear—and
          stay in a highly focused mode that I have learned to associate with good
