P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          226                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          situation vividly and walk yourself through your most constructive re-
          sponse. Then visualize the situation and solution again—and again. With
          repetition, the worst-case scenario will become routine. It will no longer
          evoke strong emotion. And that will leave you with little reason for worry.


                     COACHING CUE

          Worry can be a great signal that we are harboring larger concerns about our
          basic trade ideas. When I ﬁnd myself glued to the screen, following the market
          tick by tick during a longer-term trade, I know that something is wrong. Be-
          neath the worries about the market’s moment-to-moment action, I have deeper
          concerns—perhaps that my basic idea is wrong all along. This can be a useful
          signal: when we’re comfortable with trades, we don’t need to worry over every
          tick in the market. And when we are worrying about those ticks, it’s a good sign
          that we’re not comfortable with our position—and that can lead to constructive
          reevaluation and planning.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          7: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-seven-links.html
               Chapter 9 of Enhancing Trader Performance details several strategies
          for changing behaviors that interfere with trading decisions, including a
          step-by-step description of exposure-based methods. See also Chapter 8 of
          that book for cognitive and cognitive-behavioral techniques.
               A detailed account of behavioral approaches to change can be found
          in the chapter “Brief Behavior Therapy” by Hembree, Roth, Bux, and
          Foa in The Art and Science of Brief Psychotherapies, edited by Dewan,
          Steenbarger, and Greenberg (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2004).
               Articles relevant to behavioral views of trading can be found among
          my collected articles, including the articles on “Behavioral Patterns That
          Sabotage Traders” and “Techniques for Overcoming Performance Anxiety
          in Trading”: www.brettsteenbarger.com/articles.htm
               Articles on emotional intelligence, staying in the zone, and balancing
          trading with the rest of life can be found in Psychology of Trading, edited
          by Laura Sether (W&A Publishing, 2007).
