P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                            259

          that we will not trend higher. By proactively exiting the position, I save
          myself money and can position myself for the next trade.
               What this suggests is that it is important to be right in the markets,
          but it is even more valuable to know when you’re right. Very success-
          ful traders, I find, press their advantage when they know they’re right,
          and they’re good at knowing when they’re right. This means that they are
          keen observers of markets in real time, able to assess when their trade
          ideas—their hypotheses—are working out and when they’re not. They are
          good traders because they’re good managers of their trades.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to assess your trade management as
          a separate profit center. Do you scale into trade ideas? Do you act aggres-
          sively on your best ideas when you are right? If you’re like many traders,
          this is an underdeveloped part of your trading business. It may take a return
          to simulation mode and practice with small additions to trades to cultivate
          your trade management skills. It may also mean that you structure your
          time while you’re in trades, highlighting the information most relevant for
          the management of your particular idea. Most of all it means cultivating
          an aggressive mindset for those occasions when you know you have the
          market nailed.
               As your own trading coach, you want to make the most of your assets.
          It’s easy to identify traders who exit the business because they lose money.
          It’s harder to appreciate the equally large number of traders who never
          meet their potential because they don’t make the most of their winning
          ideas. A great exercise is to add to every position at least once on paper
          after you’ve made your real-money entry. Then track the execution of your
          added piece, its profitability, the heat you take on it, etc. In short, treat
          trade management the way you would treat trading a totally new market,
          with its own learning curve and need for practice and feedback. You don’t
          have to be right all the time; the key is to know when you’re right and make
          the most of those opportunities.


                     COACHING CUE

          Track your trades in which you exit the market prior to your stops being hit.
          Does that discretionary trade management save you money or cost you money?
          It’s important to understand your management practices and whether they add
          value to your business.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
