P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          150                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH


          trading forums are Elite Trader (www.elitetrader.com) and Trade2Win (www.
          trade2win.com). Both can be ways of sharing information with other traders and
          connecting with peers. For those developing trading systems, the community
          that has developed around the TradeStation platform (www.tradestation.com)
          is worth checking out. Indeed, if you have a favorite trading platform or ap-
          plication, connecting with others who are using the same tools can be quite
          valuable. Market Delta (www.marketdelta.com) runs educational programs for
          users and maintains a Web presence for users, as does Trade Ideas (www.trade-
          ideas.com); these are two trading applications I’ve found useful.



          LESSON 47: TOLERATE DISCOMFORT

          An important insight from psychodynamic psychology is that our
          defenses—the ways we cope with the pain from past patterns of
          conflict—can take a physical manifestation. Consider a trader who is
          caught in a losing position. He watches, tick after tick, as the trade grinds
          against him. Gradually, he becomes tenser: he hunches over the screen,
          tightens his neck and forehead muscles, and grips his mouse tightly. This
          physical tension can be seen as a defensive strategy. This strategy cuts off
          other, threatening physical and emotional experiences. Perhaps the trader
          would love to yell and curse, but is afraid to lose control. Perhaps the trader
          just wants to cry, saddened by a series of needless losses. Not wanting to
          seem weak, he holds back the tears with his tension.
               There are many other physical manifestations of defense. Consider the
          trader who is conflicted about acting on a well-researched trading signal.
          As his anxiety mounts, he tells himself that the market is too uncertain and
          he walks away from the screen, only to find that his signal was valid after
          all. His avoidant defense—leaving the situation—temporarily defuses his
          nervousness, but it also keeps him from figuring markets out and acting on
          opportunity.
               Still another physical defense occurs when traders act out of frustra-
          tion, pounding a table, throwing their mouse, or cursing loudly and blaming
          unseen others for their losses. By venting their feelings, they avoid intro-
          spection and self-responsibility. Their defense is against the guilt and the
          awareness that they have been hurting their portfolios.

              Often we use our bodies to keep our feelings out of sight, out of
              mind.

             One of my subtle defenses is that, when I sense a position isn’t going
          my way, I’ll begin a frantic scan of information to validate my idea. Of
