P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                       159

          appropriate: friendships, close work relationships, and romantic relation-
          ships. By working through the conflict in multiple situations, new, positive
          patterns are cemented. The positive mirroring of many relationships en-
          ables the trader to internalize a sense of safety and security, which can
          be carried forward to a variety of life situations. In other words, it’s not a
          single corrective emotional experience but multiple such experiences that
          enable us to internalize a new sense of self.


              Successful self-coaching builds multiple corrective emotional ex-
              periences, so that new, constructive patterns can be internalized.

               After all, this really is the essence of psychodynamic work: redefining
          the self by creating and absorbing so many impactful, constructive experi-
          ences that it becomes impossible to remain stuck in the past. I internalized
          the identity of an author not just by writing articles and books, but also by
          interacting with editors and readers over time. There was a time when I
          sat in front of a blank screen in writer’s block mode, concerned that what
          I wrote would not find a receptive audience. Following multiple positive
          experiences with writings and readers, that is no longer a concern. The
          writing flows as naturally as conversation.
               Similarly, there may have been a time when you thought of yourself
          as a small, beginning trader. Over months and years of trading experience,
          making money and building your account, you no longer see yourself as
          a newbie. Through the positive experiences, you absorb the identity of an
          experienced, skilled trader. Think back to the process of expertise devel-
          opment from Enhancing Trader Performance: the steps that build skills
          are also the steps that construct identity. Working the learning curve, mov-
          ing from novice trader to competent trader to expert trader is more than
          building knowledge and skills. It is a transformation of self as the result of
          repeated, positive experience.


              Your training as a trader should provide ongoing corrective emo-
              tional experiences: training itself becomes a means of working
              through our shortcomings.


               When you’re at the point of working through, you want to be an ac-
          tive experience generator and tackle your patterns in as many situations
          as possible, giving yourself the opportunity to enact new ones. As prior
          lessons have emphasized, and as you’ll detect from the advice of experi-
          enced traders in Chapter 9, this is particularly powerful if you’re work-
          ing problems through with the support of trading peers. Their mirroring of
