P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                        137

          trader was close to his sibling; he never truly recovered from the fallout of
          the loss. The way that he defends against that feeling is by keeping com-
          mitments at bay. He avoids becoming too involved with his relationships
          and trading so that he can never experience a loss as painful as that from
          his childhood. This leaves him with a host of negative consequences. Most
          of all, he feels empty, not truly fulfilled in love or career.
               Most repetitive patterns can be broken down into this schematic of:

            r Need—What we are missing, what we crave.
            r Feeling State—Distress associated with not having that need met.
            r Defense—What we do to cope and avoid the painful feeling state.
            r Repetitions—How we replay defenses in current situations.
            r Consequences—The negative outcomes from our current defensive
              efforts.

               One trader I met with had an intense need for emotional support. His
          parents had divorced at an early age and his mother quickly remarried,
          forcing him to cope with joining a blended family. He frequently felt aban-
          doned by his mother, and he felt not good enough to merit his (distant)
          father’s involvement. His defense against these feelings was to take the role
          of overachiever, pushing himself to get the best grades at school, excel at
          athletics, and star in extracurricular activities. By doing more, he hoped
          to feel more worthy. As a result, however, he frequently drove himself to
          exhaustion and periods of hopelessness, as no amount of achievement
          could substitute for the parental love he missed. Unlike the trader from the
          prior example, he worked himself to the bone in trading, at times breaking
          down when his overachieving tendencies failed to bring results.
               So this, as your own trading coach, is your psychodynamic challenge:
          figure out your core need. Most often, this will be something that you
          wanted in past relationships and could not consistently obtain. It might be
          autonomy, love, respect, or support. Once you identify that need, you want
          to review your valley experiences from your sine wave charts and clearly
          identify the feeling states that have been associated with the frustration of
          your core need. Maybe that feeling is depression and sadness, maybe it’s
          anxiety, and maybe it’s anger and frustration. This feeling, quite likely, will
          be the one that is repeated in your most difficult trading experiences.


              The needs that are most unmet in our personal lives are the ones
              most likely to sabotage our trading.


              Now reflect on how you try to make that feeling go away. That is your
          defensive pattern, your way of coping with the pain of needs going unmet.
          Most likely, this coping is what most immediately brings you difficulties in
