P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          324                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 96: CONDUCT YOUR
          HISTORICAL INVESTIGATIONS

          Once you have your data downloaded and your independent and depen-
          dent variables calculated, you’re ready to take a look at the relationship be-
          tween your two sets of variables. In the last lesson, you saved your spread-
          sheet of the S&P 500 Index data with the prior day’s price change in column
          F and the next day’s change in column G. Open that sheet, and we will get
          started with our investigation.
               Your first step will be to copy the data from the sheet to a fresh work-
          sheet. We will first copy the data to the Windows clipboard, then paste into
          the new sheet. This eliminates all formulas from the sheet, because the
          clipboard saves only alphanumeric text data. This process is necessary for
          the data manipulations that will be required for our investigation.
               So, highlight all the cells in your sheet with the exception of the last
          row (the most recent day’s data). We don’t include that row in our analysis
          because there won’t be any data for the next day’s return. With the cells
          highlighted, click the Excel menu item for Edit, then select Copy. You’ll
          then exit out of the spreadsheet and instruct Windows to save the data to
          the clipboard. Open a fresh, blank sheet; click on cell A1; click the Excel
          menu item for Edit; and select Paste. Your data will be transferred to the
          new sheet, with no formulas included.
               Once you’ve done this, you’ll delete the first row of data below the
          data labels, because there will be no data for the change from the prior
          day. When you delete the row by highlighting the entire row and clicking
          Edit and selecting Delete, the rows below will move up, so that there are
          no empty rows between the data labels and the data themselves.
               You’ll now highlight all the data (including the first row of data labels),
          select the Excel menu item for Data; then select Sort; and select the option
          SP(1) in the Sort By drop down menu. You can click the button on the drop
          down menu for Descending: this will place your largest daily gain in the
          S&P 500 Index in the first row, the next largest in the second row, etc. The
          last row of data will be the day of the largest daily drop in the S&P 500
          Index.


              The Sort function separates your independent variables into high
              and low values, so that you can see how the dependent variables
              are affected.

               Now we’re ready to explore the data. For the purpose of the illus-
          tration, I’ll assume that your data labels are in row 1 and that you have
          999 rows of data (998 days of S&P data plus the row of labels). Below
