P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         155

               As your own trading coach, you have the ability to create your own
          trading experiences. By controlling your risk exposure, executing trades
          only when there is a favorable reward-to-risk ratio, and limiting your se-
          tups to clear, tested patterns, you have the opportunity to create trading
          experiences that don’t follow the transference script—much as my thera-
          pist refused to accept the role I had cast for him. If your problem is handling
          frustration, your challenge is to create manageable frustrations in how you
          approach markets. If your pattern is escapism, your task is to find safe ways
          of staying in trades, in accordance with plans.



              Create trading experiences in which you can safely face your fears
              and constructively give voice to frustrations. That experience pro-
              vides new endings to old scripts.



               When we project hated qualities onto markets, we divide ourselves.
          Part of us fights the trading process and part of us is tries to stay absorbed
          in it. Thus distracted and divided, we are less able to pick up on market
          patterns and shifts among those.
               There’s a saying traders use: “Let the market come to you.” What that
          implies is that you should approach markets with an open mind, process-
          ing patterns as they unfold. This means being free of projections, free
          of conflicts that we transfer to our trading. By tracking how you talk
          to markets—and about them—you can step back from those repetitive
          themes and truly let markets come to you.



                     COACHING CUE

          You can see from the foregoing discussion why it is so important psychologically
          to reduce your trading size/risk when you are experiencing trading diﬃculties.
          This provides a safe context for trying out new ideas and tweaking your meth-
          ods, so that you can face market problems directly and constructively rather
          than respond with defensiveness. When we make our trading more planned and
          rule-governed, we create experiences of control. When we reduce risk, we cre-
          ate experiences of safety. The essence of self-coaching in the psychodynamic
          mode is to generate new and powerful experiences that change how we deal
          with self, others, and world. Fashioning new trading experiences enables you to
          experience your trading and your markets in fresh ways that open the door to
          opportunity.
