P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          170                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 53: LEARN FROM YOUR
          WORST TRADES

          Alcoholics Anonymous teaches people to become aware of their stinkin’
          thinkin’. But we don’t have to be alcoholics to process the world in dis-
          torted ways. We develop repetitive patterns of behavior, and we follow
          daily routines. Most of us are creatures of habit: we tend to go through
          consistent morning routines, eat at the same times of day, and go to sleep
          around the same hour. We take the same routes to and from work, and
          we listen to the same music, watch the same television shows. There’s not
          much in our lives that isn’t patterned.
               So it is with our thinking. We learn ways of processing information,
          and these become part of our routines. We blame ourselves to help avoid
          conflict with others; we anticipate negative outcomes to help us not be-
          come surprised when things go wrong. In individual situations, such modes
          of thinking may suit us well. As engrained habit patterns, however, they im-
          pose distortions upon the world. After all, not everything really is our fault.
          Not every event does go poorly.


              Our negative thought patterns are learned habits; the key to cog-
              nitive work is unlearning them and replacing them with more con-
              structive ways of processing events.


               Once these modes of thinking become automatic, their accompanying
          feelings follow along. When we blame ourselves, we feel discouraged, di-
          minished, and depressed. When we anticipate the worst, we feel anxious
          and uncertain. To the extent that we bring these schemas to trading, we no
          longer respond to markets objectively. We are like robots, responding with
          automatic thoughts and unwanted feelings.
               As Gurdjieff noted, it is important to become emotionally aware of this
          reality: At some point you’re deeply absorbed in trading, observing market
          patterns, and acting upon those. Then a shift occurs, and you are no longer
          in control of your thinking. It has become hijacked. An activated schema
          now sets off an avalanche of thoughts and feelings that may very well have
          nothing to do with the situation at hand. Suppose someone hijacked your
          computer as you were trading and suddenly switched the screen from your
          markets to some other, random ones? Suppose your mouse was taken out
          of your control and clicked on trades that you didn’t want?
               I guarantee, if that happened to you, you’d become very upset. You
          would not tolerate someone controlling your computer or your mouse. You
          would do everything in your power to regain control of your equipment.
          That has to become your attitude toward the hijacking of your mind. It’s not
          enough to simply observe automatic thoughts taking control; you need to
