P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          50                                                      THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          in figuring out what is working in our trading and what isn’t. The key
          word in that last sentence is temporarily. Just because we’re discouraged
          doesn’t mean we should feign optimism: perhaps there’s good reason for
          our motivational suppression. By stepping back, we can investigate possi-
          ble market-based reasons for our feelings.
               Other times, our discouragement may be providing us with informa-
          tion that our expectations are too unrealistic. If, in the back of our minds,
          we’re hoping or expecting to make money each trading day, we’re setting
          ourselves up for considerable disappointment when we undergo a streak
          of losing trades or days that is entirely expectable by chance. In such cases,
          our motivational suppression provides a clue that we need to investigate,
          not just markets, but ourselves. When we expect the best, we leave our-
          selves poorly prepared for the worst.
               There’s a third source of reduced drive and motivation, and that’s
          burnout. Psychological burnout occurs when we feel overwhelmed by the
          demands that we face. Very often, among traders, burnout signifies a lack
          of life balance: becoming so immersed in the stresses of trading that recre-
          ational, social, creative, and spiritual outlets are lost. While such immer-
          sion is possible—and sometimes necessary—for short stretches of time,
          the immersion leaves a trader impaired over the long run. This is not so
          much motivational suppression as motivational exhaustion. It is difficult
          to sustain energy and enthusiasm when we’re operating on overload.


               Burnout occurs when we feel that the demands on us exceed our
               resources for dealing with them.

                In each scenario, the trader who serves as his own coach treats the lost
          drive as information. Maybe it’s a reflection of changes in markets; maybe
          it’s a sign of unrealistic self-demands or a signal that life is out of balance. If
          you feel discouraged about your recent trading, your first priority is to iden-
          tify what that feeling is telling you, so that you can take appropriate action.
                If market trends, themes, or volatility have shifted, altering the prof-
          itability of your trading setups and ideas, then your action should be a
          reduction in your risk-taking while you see which patterns, markets, and
          ideas are working, so that you can focus efforts on those. You also want
          to review your most recent trading performance to see if you can identify
          markets and patterns that have continued to work for you, even as others
          have shifted. Reduce your risk, reassess your trading, and you preserve
          your capital and turn discouragement into opportunity.
                If the feeling like giving up is more a function of your own self-
          demands, then your challenge is to redouble your efforts at goal setting,
          making sure that each day and week starts with realistic, achievable goals.
          When basketball players get into slumps, their coaches will set up plays for
