P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                    205



              Many traders fail to sustain work on their trading because they find
              little positive reinforcement in their work.

               Trainers use frequent rewards to teach animals tricks. The trainers
          don’t expect the dog to, say, jump through the hoops all at once. Rather,
          they will first give a reward each time the dog approaches the hoop. Then
          the trainer will wait for the dog to go through the hoop before they dole out
          the reward. Then they’ll lift the hoop just a couple of inches and reward the
          dog when it jumps through the hoop. Then they’ll add a second hoop and
          a third . . . they’ll raise the hoops a little at a time . . . all the while requir-
          ing new behaviors that are closer to the desired endpoint before giving the
          reward.
               This process is known as shaping. Trainers shape animal behaviors
          by rewarding successive approximations to desired ends. In a classroom,
          a teacher might first reward a disruptive student for five minutes of quiet
          attention. Later, it will take 10 minutes for the student to earn the reward;
          eventually the reward will require an entire class period of good behav-
          ior. Frequent-flyer programs at airlines aren’t so different. At first, you earn
          bonuses for simply joining the programs. Only after you ride the airline reg-
          ularly, however, do you earn later rewards. If you want the greatest perks,
          you have to shape your riding habits to fit the program.
               Shaping is a testament to the power of positive reinforcement. Imagine
          punishing the dog for not going through the hoops. The chances are good
          that the dog would simply cower in the presence of the trainer; it certainly
          wouldn’t figure out the right behaviors from the punishment of the wrong.
               When you are your own trading coach, you are the trainer as well
          as trainee. You are teaching yourself to jump through the hoops of good
          trading. For this reason, you need an approach to coaching that is grounded
          in positive reinforcement. Your coaching must stay relentlessly positive,
          building desired trading behaviors—not punishing the wrong ones.

              You can keep a positive tone to the learning process by shaping
              your trading behaviors: rewarding small, incremental progress to-
              ward the desired ends.

              The first place to implement the shaping approach is in a journal. As an
          experiment and a worthwhile exercise, try keeping a positive trading jour-
          nal for a few weeks. Divide your trading into several categories, such as:
            r Research and preparation.
            r Quality of trade ideas (ideas that carry conviction).
