P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         313


               For the collection of clean intraday data, I’ve found TickData (www.
          tickdata.com) to be a particularly valuable vendor. The data management
          software that accompanies the historical data enables you to place the data
          in any time frame and store them as files within Excel. This is a great way to
          build a historical database of intraday information quickly, including price
          data for stocks and futures and a surprising array of indicator data.
               If you go with a historical data vendor, you’ll have plenty of data for
          exploration and the updating process will be easy. Manual updating of
          data from charting platforms is more cumbersome and time-consuming,
          but obviously cheaper if you’re already subscribing to the data service. It
          is important thing that you obtain the data you most want from reliable
          sources in user-friendly ways. If the process becomes too cumbersome,
          you’ll quickly abandon it.
               As your own trading coach, you want to make the learning process
          stimulating and enjoyable; that is how you’ll sustain positive motivation.
          Focus on what you already look at in your trading and limit your initial
          data collection to those elements. Price, volume, and a few basic variables
          for each stock, sector, index, or futures contract that you typically look at
          will be plenty at first. Adding data is never a problem. The key is to organize
          the information in a way that will make it easy for you to pull out what you
          want, when you want it. As you become proficient at observing historical
          patterns, you’ll be pleasantly surprised at how this process prepares you
          for recognizing the patterns as they emerge in real time.


                     COACHING CUE

          Consider setting up separate data archives for daily and weekly data, so that
          you can investigate patterns covering periods from a single day to several
          weeks. You’d be surprised how many hypotheses can be generated from simple
          open-high-low-close price data alone. How do returns diﬀer after an up day
          versus a down day? What happens after a down day in which the day’s range
          is the highest of the past 20 days? What happens after three consecutive up
          or down days? How do the returns diﬀer following a down day during a down
          week versus a down day during an up week? You can learn quite a bit simply
          by investigating price data.




          LESSON 93: EXCEL BASICS

          In this lesson, I’ll go over just a few essentials of Excel that I employ
          in examining historical market data. If you do not already have a basic
