P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          104                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               You might ask the question, “How can I, as a trader relatively unedu-
          cated in applied psychology, ever hope to identify obscure patterns such
          as low hormone levels? If experienced coaches and counselors miss the
          pattern, how can I detect it?”
               Ironically, I think that you’re in better shape than most commercial
          coaches to identify and act upon unusual patterns that interfere with good
          trading. I could readily make the recommendation for the trader because
          I was not seeking her business. She was not paying me for my services
          and I did not stand to gain by making one recommendation versus an-
          other. (Note: my coaching is limited to a limited group of proprietary trad-
          ing firms, hedge funds, and investment banks; I don’t take on individual
          traders as clients.) Most coaches who focus on retail traders, on the other
          hand, need to constantly drum up business. It is not in their self-interest to
          raise a possible course of action (such as blood tests and thyroid medica-
          tion) that doesn’t lead to further services and additional fees. As a result,
          they focus on solutions that they can provide (i.e., that will bring them ad-
          ditional business). When all you have is a hammer, Maslow once remarked,
          you tend to treat everything as nails.
               As your own trading coach, you have no such conflicts of interest. You
          can learn pattern recognition for yourself and diagnose your own concerns.
          If the problem still eludes you, even after you’ve reviewed your journal
          extensively, send an e-mail to the special address reserved for this book
          (coachingself@aol.com; see the Conclusion) and I will do my best to point
          you in a promising direction. But I think you’ll be pleasantly surprised to
          find how readily you can tackle your own challenges once you learn a few
          basic techniques.

              Once you learn to coach yourself, you have the skills to guide your
              development across a lifetime.

              So let’s see how you can become expert in recognizing your own pat-
          terns, building on the trading journal described in the previous lesson. Re-
          viewing your journal entries, you want to divide them into two clusters:
          those describing your most successful trading and those that capture when
          you were trading at your worst. The first cluster will reveal what we call
          solution patterns; the second cluster alerts you to problem patterns. Many
          times, the difference between the solution and problem patterns will them-
          selves point you to practical actions you can take to improve your perfor-
          mance. For instance, you might notice that during your successful trad-
          ing you’re more patient entering trades and take fewer trades, each with
          smaller size. When you’re less successful, you trade more often and with
          maximum size.
              The comparison between best and worst trading will also alert you
          to differences in your coping with market challenges. You may find, for
