P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          45

          patterns. Those negative consequences could include emotional distress,
          losing money on a trade, or failure to take advantage of an opportunity.
          When we clearly link maladaptive patterns to negative consequences, we
          develop and sustain the motivation to change those patterns. That third
          column should spell out in detail the costs of the recurring pattern: how,
          specifically, the pattern interferes with your happiness and trading success.
          The clearer you are about the pattern and its occurrence and the more
          strongly you feel about the costs it imposes on you, the more likely you’ll be
          to catch the pattern in real time and be motivated to interrupt and change it.
               For now, however, your goal should be to identify your repetitive pat-
          terns and their consequences—not to try to change those patterns all at
          once. You cannot change something if you’re not aware of it. The psycho-
          logical journal is a powerful tool for building that awareness and under-
          standing what is generating your distress. Keep the journal for 30 consecu-
          tive days to help you see just about every variation of your most common
          patterns. It will also begin the process of turning self-observation into a
          habit pattern—a positive pattern that can aid you in your personal life and
          in your trading.


                      COACHING CUE

          Begin your psychological journal by tracking your individual trades and focusing
          on those situations in which your mindset took you out of proper execution or
          management of those trade ideas. In other words, these will be instances in
          which you failed to follow your trading rules, not ones in which you followed
          the rules and just happened to be wrong on your ideas. Replay these trades
          in your mind—or, better yet, consider videotaping your trading and observing
          those trades directly—and then jot down what set you oﬀ (Column A); what
          was going through your mind (Column B); and how it aﬀected your trading
          (Column C). Zero in on how much money that trigger situation cost you. With
          practice, you’ll build your internal observer and start noticing these situations
          as they are occurring. That will give you an opportunity to create a diﬀerent
          ending to the script.




          LESSON 15: PRESSING: WHEN YOU TRY
          TOO HARD TO MAKE MONEY

          Traders call it pressing: forcing trades in an attempt to make money. Some-
          times it takes the form of trading too large; other times traders press
          by trading too often. The hallmark of pressing is trying to make things
          happen. This is 180 degrees from a mindset in which you trade selectively,
