P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          240                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          variation around this average: the range of daily swings that is typical for
          your trading. The variation in your daily returns will ultimately shape the
          size of drawdowns you experience in your portfolio. Given that you’re go-
          ing to experience runs of losing days over your career, you’ll have larger
          drawdowns when those runs are 2 percent each than if they’re 1/2 percent.
          Indeed, if you investigate the losing periods that are historically typical
          of your trading, you can use these to calibrate the daily variability you
          want to tolerate in your trading. This is central to risk management. If you
          want to keep total drawdowns in your portfolio to less than 10 percent, for
          example, you cannot risk average daily swings of 2 percent. Of course, if
          you’re keeping drawdowns to less than 10 percent, you also cannot expect
          to be making 50 percent or more per year: risk and reward will be pro-
          portional. By calibrating the average swing in your portfolio per day, you
          target both overall risk and reward. If you’re trading very well (i.e., very
          profitably) with a relatively low variation in your portfolio size from day to
          day, you can probably afford to gradually pick up your risk (increase trade
          size to generate larger returns). If you’re trading poorly and losing money
          beyond your norms, you may want to reduce your daily variation and cut
          your risk.
              What all of this means is that, when you’re your own trading coach, you
          are also your own scorekeeper. The metrics above are, in my estimation,
          an essential part of the journals of any serious trader. The more you know
          about how you’re doing, the more prepared you’ll be to expand on your
          strengths and address your vulnerabilities.


                      COACHING CUE

          See David Adler’s lesson in Chapter 9 for additional perspectives on trader met-
          rics. A particular focus that is helpful is to examine what happens to your trades
          after your entry and what happens to them following your exit. Knowing the av-
          erage heat that you take on winning trades helps you gauge your execution skill;
          knowing the average move in your favor following your exit enables you to track
          the value of your exit criteria. Sometimes the most important data don’t show
          up on a P/L summary: how much money you left on the table by not patiently
          waiting for a good entry price or by exiting a move precipitously.




          LESSON 75: ADVANCED SCOREKEEPING
          FOR YOUR TRADING BUSINESS

          After the last lesson, you may be feeling overwhelmed by the data you
          need to keep to truly track and understand your trading business. I’m
