P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          274                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Becoming an Amateur Trading Psychologist
              “I had picked up bits and pieces about trading psychology over time,”
              Michael notes, “but it wasn’t until I read a book dedicated to the topic
              that things really jelled for me. The book I read was Trading in the
              Zone by Mark Douglas. The book crystallized all those bits and pieces
              I’d picked up, as well as forced me to take a look at my own beliefs and
              behaviors. It’s one of those books in which I get something different
              each time I read it. Long before I read Trading in the Zone, I knew
              logically that trading was nothing but a game of probabilities. I knew all
              about expectancy and that I could still make money, even if I had more
              losing trades than winning trades. Yet there was a disconnect between
              my knowledge and my actions while actually trading. The book made
              it very clear to me that I needed to accept that I won’t know, nor do
              I need to know, how any given trade is going to turn out. It made me
              realize that, as long as I stuck to my business/trading plan and kept
              taking good setups, I would make money over time.”


              When we become our own psychologists, we bridge the gap be-
              tween what we know and what we feel.


              Listening to Trading Affirmations
              “A few years ago, I purchased a CD called Trader Affirmation from the
              Day Trading Course site (www.DayTradingCourse.com/cd/),” Michael
              recalls. “The CD has about 30 minutes of someone reading a list of
              affirmations to help the trader’s state of mind. I try to listen to the af-
              firmations at least twice a week, usually while I’m showering in the
              morning. The affirmations help me to remember all the things I’ve read
              in the aforementioned book on trading psychology. Listening to them
              has been a great help in keeping my head on straight.” To be honest,
              I’ve never been a big fan of the whole idea of positive thinking and af-
              firmations (I haven’t heard the CD that Michael uses), but I have to say
              that what Michael says makes a great deal of sense. It’s not enough to
              read a book on trading psychology and file away the lessons. Rather,
              you need to repeat those lessons in order for them to sink in. That has
              become a part of Michael’s weekly routine, helping him cement his ef-
              forts at becoming his own psychologist.

               Your assignment for this lesson is to identify and implement one
          weekly routine to help you internalize sound trading practices. This rou-
          tine could be listening to a CD (or even your own self-recorded messages),
          or it could be a structured review of your trading journal with a colleague.
