P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          176                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          the links among your thoughts, as events trigger distortions in process-
          ing, which bring further events, and still additional distortions. Your as-
          signment is to capture the flow of your thoughts and the connections of
          these to your feelings and actions. Only once you clearly see how the men-
          tal dominoes fall can you interrupt the process by turning your mind in a
          different direction.


                      COACHING CUE

          What are the schemas and thoughts that accompany your best trades? Extend-
          ing your journal to include how you think when you’re trading very well helps
          you take a solution-focused approach to cognitive work. The last lesson in this
          chapter may provide some ideas along this line. Also keep an eye out for the
          hope schema, in which trades that are losing money trigger automatic thoughts
          of hope for a return to breakeven. Those thoughts often lead to violation of stop-
          loss rules and trigger subsequent schemas of regret and self-blame. There’s a
          role for intuition in trading, but beware situations in which you are into wishin’.
          Those are usually excellent points to get ﬂat and regain perspective. When you
          are your own observer, your negative thoughts can themselves become reliable
          trading indicators.




          LESSON 55: DISRUPT NEGATIVE
          THOUGHT PATTERNS

          How do you break a habit pattern? When we have a smoking habit, or when
          we find ourselves eating out of habit, one of the first steps toward change
          is simply catching ourselves in the act of repeating our unwanted actions.
          By disrupting a habit pattern, we gradually make it less automatic, less
          capable of controlling us.
               So it is with our habitual thought patterns. When we interrupt and dis-
          rupt these patterns, they become less automatic. We gain a measure of
          control over them; they no longer take control from us.
               The most basic technique to disrupt negative thought patterns is
          thought-stopping. Thought-stopping is exactly what it suggests: a con-
          scious effort to stop a train of thinking while it is occurring. When you
          have used cognitive journals and reviews of your trading to clearly iden-
          tify your pattern of automatic thoughts, you become increasingly sensitive
          to their recurrence. This enables you to recognize their appearance in real
          time. By giving yourself the command to Stop!, you disrupt the automatic
          nature of the thinking. This gives you time to calm down, change the focus
          of your attention, and engage in other useful cognitive exercises.
