P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          278                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              driven by indicators or news reports,” Corey explains. “This was a
              process that took time and was difficult for me. Previously, I viewed
              multiple indicators and believed those were the secret to trading suc-
              cess. However, too much conflicting information was not only frus-
              trating, but unprofitable. Even when I decreased the number of in-
              dicators, I still struggled to find profitability. My results were often
              no better than random entries, which was endlessly disappointing.
              The shift came when I was able to view markets and price behav-
              ior conceptually . . . The shift happened slowly and was attributable in
              part to studying Market Profile information, such as the concepts of
              trend day, bracketing markets, auction dynamics, timeframe partici-
              pation, etc. Other concepts were based in the teachings of the early
              founders of technical analysis, including momentum, price range (ex-
              pansion/contraction), broader trend structure, dynamics of price be-
              havior, and price patterns (with their underlying reasons: accumula-
              tion or distribution, reversal or continuation). Essentially the shift was
              one towards greater understanding of price behavior and participation
              by all sorts of market participants . . . To further the conceptualization
              switch, I also began researching the broader concepts of intermarket
              analysis, which compares markets to each other, and sector rotation,
              which details performance of equity sectors and expectations . . . I be-
              gan to see markets as a grand chess game, which opened up a new
              method of perception. Markets clearly do not trade in isolation.”

              When you think in concepts, you understand why markets move,
              and that helps you formulate promising trade ideas.


              Keeping an Idealized Trade Notebook
              Corey explains, “In addition to keeping a simple spreadsheet that
              tracks trading performance (which is essential in knowing when you’re
              making mistakes and correcting them), I use a different kind of trad-
              ing journal that I call my idealized trade notebook. In this notebook, I
              print off the intraday chart (I use the five-minute chart most frequently)
              of the stock or index I traded for the day. Also, if there are particular
              charts I find interesting, I annotate by hand what I deem to be ideal (or
              best) trades based on my understanding of price behavior and oppor-
              tunity. Through looking at the charts at the end of the day without the
              pressure of real-time trading, I am able to see new patterns that I had
              missed . . . I then overlay my fills to see how close I came to achieving
              the total potential move . . . This serves a dual purpose of deeper visu-
              alization of my performance, but more importantly, helps clarify the
