P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               219

              As a beginning exercise, here is a very basic exposure routine that you
          can apply to almost any trading patterns that you wish to change. I have
          found that this works very well for reprogramming anxiety responses to
          market situations and frustration/anger responses. Any time a situation
          evokes an exaggerated emotional and/or behavioral response from you,
          exposure methods can be used to alter your reactions:

              Step 1. Seat yourself comfortably, listening to relaxing music through
                 headphones. While listening, close your eyes and breathe deeply
                 and slowly. Keep yourself still physically and keep your mind fo-
                 cused on the music.
              Step 2. Start with lower part of your body and gradually tense and
                 relax the muscles, performing several repetitions with each muscle
                 group before moving higher along your body. Thus you tense and
                 relax your toes several times, then your flex your foot, then your
                 lower leg, etc. All the while you are tensing and relaxing, you are
                 breathing deeply and slowly and staying focused on the music.
              Step 3. Once you reach the top of your body, tensing and relaxing the
                 muscles of your face, you then take a few more deep breaths and
                 notice your body’s relaxation.
              Step 4. With the music still playing, imagine in detail a trading situ-
                 ation that you anticipate. Visualize the position you’re in and the
                 market movement. Imagine the market behaving in a way that nor-
                 mally would trigger your fear, frustration, etc. All the while, you
                 are breathing deeply and slowly, keeping your muscles relaxed,
                 and playing the music in the background.
              Step 5. When you feel yourself tense up or experience fear or frustra-
                 tion, stop the visualization (freeze the frame) and simply go back
                 to breathing deeply and slowly and listening to the music. Once
                 you’re relaxed again, continue the scenario from where you left
                 off. Make sure you freeze things and keep yourself calm and fo-
                 cused when trigger responses start to affect your visualization.
              Step 6. If you had to interrupt the visualization to keep yourself calm,
                 repeat the exact same scenario the same way until you can get all
                 the way through without having to freeze the scene. At that point,
                 you’ve extinguished the response to the situation.
              Step 7. After you master one scenario, construct variations of the
                 scenario, perhaps making each one a bit more stressful. Once
                 again, don’t move on to another scene until you’ve been able to
                 keep yourself fully relaxed and focused during the scene you’ve
                 been rehearsing. If you can stay calm and focused during a
