P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          32                                                       THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          a lifestyle that we see exemplary performance. At that point, self-coaching
          becomes a life philosophy—an organizing principle—not just a discrete ac-
          tivity among many during the day or week.


                      COACHING CUE

          What is the one change you most want to make outside of trading? Develop a
          daily plan for action on the goal that will help your trading eﬀorts. It’s all about
          strengthening the coach within you, whether you’re working on your ﬁnances,
          your relationships, your physical conditioning, or your chess game. The goal is
          to become a change agent, a master of change across all spheres of life. Working
          on your nontrading life is a way of building your self-coaching as a trader.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the topic
          of change at the home page on the blog for Chapter 1:
          http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-one-links.html
               Some changes—particularly of problems that have been longstanding
          and that interfere with relationships and/or work in a significant way—may
          require more than self-coaching. Here is a referral list for cognitive thera-
          pists that I’ve found helpful:
          http://www.academyofct.org/Library/CertifiedMembers/Index.asp?Folder
          ID=1137
               For a detailed, research-based summary of the literature on change,
          check out Bergin and Garfield’s Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behav-
          ior Change, published by Wiley and in its fifth edition (2003). Of particu-
          lar relevance are the chapters in Section 2, dealing with “Evaluating the
          Ingredients of Therapeutic Efficacy.”
               For an overview of short-term approaches to change, check out my
          chapter on “Brief Therapy” in the Handbook of Clinical Psychology, Vol-
          ume 1 edited by Michel Hersen and Alan M. Gross, also published by Wiley
          (2008).
               A worthwhile collection of creative approaches to change can be found
          in Clinical Strategies for Becoming a Master Psychotherapist edited by
          William O’Donohue, Nicholas A. Cummings, and Janet L. Cummings (Aca-
          demic Press, 2006), including my chapter on “The Importance of Novelty
          in Psychotherapy.”
