P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          283


          LESSON 86: LEARN TO BE FALLIBLE

          Dave Mabe is a trader, system developer, and founder of the StockTickr
          service and site (www.stocktickr.com). StockTickr is a unique resource
          because it enables traders to track their ideas and performance in an on-
          line format that can be shared with selected groups of traders. This Web
          2.0 approach to developing ideas and tracking progress enables traders
          to build their own community of like-minded peers. The StockTickr site
          also includes an informative blog featuring interviews with traders who
          share their work online. I particularly like how StockTickr has created
          a true online trading journal, making journaling a social activity. It gives
          traders control over what they share and with whom. Indeed, there is
          huge potential simply in the idea of sharing a real-time journal with a
          trading coach.
               Chris Perruna is a full-time trader and blogger whose work can be
          found on the site that bears his name (www.chrisperruna.com). His site
          is devoted to “successful investing through education” and covers topics
          ranging from screening for fundamentals among stocks to position siz-
          ing and charting. He shares his stock screens with readers, along with
          specific trade ideas. I like how the site enables traders to learn from his
          example.
               Let’s take a look at how these two pros responded to my question about
          what has been most helpful to their self-coaching, starting with Dave.

              Trading Journal
              Dave asserts, “A trading journal is by far more powerful than any in-
              dicator or platform. It provides the foundation for everything I do as
              a trader. Your mind can play tricks on you, but your execution data
              don’t lie. Being able to reflect upon my trading results allows me to
              step back and view results in aggregate to see how I’m measuring up
              to my goals.” I’ve seen this with many successful traders: the journal
              offers a layer of accountability and focus that would otherwise be miss-
              ing. Dave also stresses the importance of flexibility in goal setting via
              journals. “Instead of setting a single goal (for example, a certain dollar
              amount over a time period), I find it much better to set a range of goals
              from conservative to radical. A lot of traders will set high goals, which
              set them up for devastation when they aren’t achieved.”


              We often focus on what we want to see. Statistics on our trading
              patterns don’t lie; they focus us on what we need to see.
