P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008    13:2    Printer: Yet to come




                                     CHAPTER 4



                              Steps toward
                                  Self-
                              Improvement
                               The Coaching Process


                    Success does not consist in never making mistakes
                    but in never making the same one a second time.
                                                —George Bernard Shaw



                    hat are the core processes of self-coaching? What concrete steps

         W          can we take to make changes in our trading to improve perfor-
                    mance? These are some of the topics we’ll tackle in this chapter.
               Much of this chapter comes from research over the past several
          decades that has illuminated common effective ingredients across all coun-
          seling and therapy approaches. An interesting finding from that research is
          that all of the major approaches to counseling appear to be more effect-
          ive than no counseling at all, but no single approach consistently shows
          better results across a range of people and problems. Not only do the ma-
          jor modes of helping seem to work equivalently, they also seem to work
          for many of the same reasons. Those reasons capture the essence of what
          creates change—and what can fuel our efforts to become our own trading
          coaches.



          LESSON 31: SELF-MONITOR BY
          KEEPING A TRADING JOURNAL

          Self-monitoring refers to methods that you use to track your own patterns
          of thought, feeling, and behavior over time. Self-monitoring is the founda-
          tion for many of the other self-coaching techniques described in this chap-
          ter, because it tells us what we need to change. We can’t alter a pattern

                                                                                   99
