P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          110                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              accompanied by plenty of coaching feedback and corrective
              efforts.

               When we lack a specific focus for change and jump from one trad-
          ing goal to another from day to day, we don’t really enter a learning
          curve: there is nothing cumulative in our efforts. As your own coach, you
          need to establish—and also sustain—a specific direction to guide your
          growth and development. This is the key to effective goal setting. If moti-
          vation provides the energy for self-improvement, goals supply the aim, the
          channeling of that energy.
               When you recognize a problem pattern, it is not the same as estab-
          lishing a goal for self-work, though the former usually will guide the lat-
          ter. A problem pattern alerts you to what you’re doing wrong. Goal setting
          requires an awareness of new patterns of thought, feeling, and/or action
          that will replace the problem pattern. A goal states what you are going
          to do or not do in specific situations. If you have constructed your trading
          journal and pattern-identification exercises in the ways suggested in recent
          lessons, many of your goals will naturally follow from the patterns associ-
          ated with your best trading. Your overarching goal will be to trade in the
          way that you typically trade when you’re trading well.
               Notice that I am defining goals in a process sense, rather than as ab-
          solute outcomes. This is very important. Many traders think of such goals
          as making a million dollars or being able to trade for a living. These out-
          come goals may be motivating, and definitely have their place, but they do
          not focus a trader on what she needs to do today and tomorrow to become
          better. Traders on a short time frame do not have full control over their
          outcomes: a trader can make good decisions, placing all odds in their fa-
          vor, only to lose money when markets behave in an anomalous fashion.
          What traders can control is the process of trading: how they make and
          implement decisions. The most effective daily goals emphasize trading
          well, not making oodles of money.
               The same logic guides athletic coaches. A coach may stress the goal of
          victory over the next opponent, but the day-to-day practices will emphasize
          such fundamentals as swinging at good pitches (baseball), making the ex-
          tra pass (basketball), and blocking effectively on running plays (football).
          These process goals provide the ongoing focus for practice over time and
          ensure that coaching leads to effective learning. Every coach is, at root, a
          teacher. When you’re your own coach, you guide your own learning efforts.

              Effective goals target effective trading practices that break trading
              down to component skills and then set targets for these, one at a
              time.
