P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          200                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          affects my mood. In a more fatigued state, I tend to feel less emotionally
          energetic and optimistic. I won’t look for that creative market idea; I’ll be-
          come more discouraged and risk-averse after losses. If I’m not clued into
          my physical state and its relationship to my mood, I’ll simply think that
          these periods of lesser performance are random. In fact, most mind and
          body shifts are as stimulus-response bound as any animal behavior in a
          learning experiment.
               As I emphasized in The Psychology of Trading, a great deal of our
          learning is state-based: what we know in one state of mind and body can
          be quite different from what we process in another state. When I am lis-
          tening to favorite music, my mind is expansive, I can see broad market
          relationships, and formulate big picture ideas to guide the week’s trade. In
          a state when I’m pressured for time or distracted by an irritating situation, I
          suffer from tunnel vision, losing the large perspective. On those occasions,
          I’m much more likely to make impulsive trades, responding to recent price
          action rather than broad market dynamics. Often those trades lack good
          risk/reward qualities; they are much more likely to be losers than winners.
               I refer to these subtle environmental cues as triggers, because they
          can set off behaviors that are unplanned and unwanted. When I’m irritated,
          for instance, I’ve learned to rid myself of the feeling by simply pushing
          aside whatever is bothering me. This reaction is a classic example of neg-
          ative reinforcement. If the thought of doing errands irritates me because
          I have other things I want to be doing, I quickly push the errands away
          and focus on what I want to do. The errands don’t get done, of course, and
          loom as a chronic irritant. My pattern of procrastination is clearly negative
          reinforcement–based, but it is not helpful: it leaves me with a lingering neg-
          ative mood and a backlog of unfinished business. Worse still, continually
          reinforced, the negative mood can become a pattern in my trading. It’s not
          too great a leap from procrastinating over errands to procrastinating about
          acting on a losing position.

              Many of the behavioral patterns that interfere with our day-to-day
              lives also find expression in our trading.


              Sometimes, when coaching yourself, you won’t know what is triggering
          your most troubling trading behaviors. They seem to come out of nowhere.
          That’s when it’s most important to use a trading journal to catalog all
          the possible factors—physical, situational, emotional, relationship-based,
          trading-based—that might be associated with your problematic trading.
          When you engage in this cataloging, you want as open a mind as possible;
          often, the patterns will be different from ones that you’ve been considering.
          One trader I worked with experienced trading problems for no apparent
