P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          164                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Cognitive methods help us think about our thinking and restructure
          our perceptions of self and world . Let’s take a look how. . .


          LESSON 51: SCHEMAS OF THE MIND

          Chapter 5 outlined psychodynamic approaches to the change process. That
          framework makes use of powerful emotional relationship experiences to
          break patterns of behavior left over from prior life conflicts. When applied
          to self-coaching, the psychodynamic perspective requires a dual look at
          past and present, with an eye toward recognizing occasions when we re-
          peat the past in our current responses to trading challenges. The cognitive
          framework, on the other hand, is more present-oriented. Its focus is on how
          we think and the relationship between our thinking and the ways in which
          we feel and behave.
               The cognitive approach to change, like the behavioral methods de-
          scribed in Chapter 7, is grounded in learning theory. Instead of emphasizing
          the creation of relationship experiences, the focus is on skills building. For
          that reason, homework exercises play a prominent role in cognitive work,
          which makes the cognitive modality particularly useful for self-coaching.
          In cognitive coaching, you learn skills for processing information more
          constructively.
               Many cognitive psychologists draw on the analogy of the scientist
          when describing our thought processes. Scientists observe nature and look
          for patterns and regularities. Once scientists observed these relationships,
          they develop theories to explain their observations. Experiments test these
          theories and provide new observations that enable scientists to modify
          their theories. Over time, science arrives at ever more refined understand-
          ings of the world through the process of testing, observing, modifying, and
          testing further.
               Cognitive researchers call the theories in our head schemas. These
          schemas are like mental maps, orienting us to the world around us. We
          interpret events and interactions with others through these schemas, as-
          similating new events to them when possible and accommodating our
          understandings to fit new events when needed. As developmental psychol-
          ogist Jean Piaget explained, this process of assimilation and accommoda-
          tion provides us with deeper and richer understandings of our world. We
          are always elaborating our maps of reality.

              We never experience the world directly; all perception is filtered
              through our mental maps. If our maps distort the world, our per-
              ceptions will be distorted.
