P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                    87

               I recently researched a new pattern that I wanted to trade and saw
          an opportunity in early-morning trading. I vacillated between placing a
          small-sized trade and one more normal in size. I thought about the trade
          going against me and realized that I didn’t really want to lose money on
          a relatively untested idea. With the smaller trade, I didn’t care about the
          implications of the profitability of the trade for my portfolio. A larger trade
          could dent my week’s performance, and that would have been frustrating
          to me. So I placed the small trade, observed the pattern in real time, made
          a small profit, and started the process of integrating the pattern in my usual
          trading.
               In selecting trade size, I was letting my psychological resilience dic-
          tate my risk taking. When I traded to my resilience level, I kept myself in
          a favorable state regardless of the trade’s outcome. “How will I feel if I’m
          stopped out?” dictated my trading size. To be sure, this can be taken to an
          unhealthy, risk-averse extreme. We can take so little risk on trades that we
          severely diminish potential returns. The key is to know yourself and espe-
          cially the limits of your resilience. Occasionally I’ll fantasize about placing
          an über trade on a promising idea and taking a mammoth profit. I realize,
          however, that such a trade can overwhelm my resilience. As soon as the po-
          sition went against me—even in a normal, expectable adverse excursion—I
          would be stressing about the dollars lost. Undoubtedly this would prevent
          me from managing the trade effectively.
               Successful traders learn to build their resilience over time and adapt
          to stresses that at one time might have been overwhelming. That small
          trade I recently placed would have qualified as a large trade back in the late
          1970s when I placed my first trades. Now it is emotionally inconsequential.
          Experience builds adaptation: we can generally handle familiar situations
          with a high degree of resilience.


              When we master one level of challenge, we build resilience for the
              next level.

              The most effective way of to build emotional resilience is to undergo
          repeated, normal drawdowns and see—in your own experience—that
          you can overcome those. Our losses provide us with the deep emotional
          conviction that we can weather losses and ultimately prosper. Someone
          who has undergone many life setbacks and bounced back acquires the con-
          fidence that he can land on his feet in almost any situation. The trader who
          experiences repeated drawdown, only to later hit fresh equity highs, knows
          that she has nothing to fear during normal performance pullbacks.
              When you are your own trading coach, your challenge is not only to
          sustain a high level of resilience, but also to build that resilience over time.
