P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          222                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          gain with excitement (and with a mental accounting of his paper profits).
          Instead, he visualized staying calm by reaffirming his plan for the trade.

              Getting excited by gains in a trade is the first step toward getting
              panicky when those gains are threatened.

               Only after the trader had mastered this aspect of the trading situation
          did we proceed to imagining that the market retraced some of its initial
          move, eroding a portion of his gain. Again and again, he imagined this re-
          tracement while breathing deeply and slowly and staying focused on the
          computer screen (which displayed his biofeedback readings), until the im-
          agery of the retracement no longer brought fear or concern. At that point
          we mentally rehearsed the pullbacks all over again, this time while not only
          staying calm and focused but also while mentally reviewing his trade idea
          and his exits. Our trader spontaneously began to focus his attention on how
          proud he would feel if he just stuck with his ideas and saw them through.
          This pride, for him, was the opposite of the guilt he had been feeling. When
          he invoked this sense of pride, he not only extinguished his old behavior,
          but also positively reinforced his discipline.
               The key to making this work is mentally rehearsing the right trading
          behaviors while you’re in the state that normally triggers the wrong ones.
          When you’re your own trading coach, your challenge isn’t simply to figure
          out the right things to do. Rather, your job is to be able to act in the right
          ways in situations that normally pull for all the wrong trading behaviors.
          If you practice good trading when you’re not in realistic trading situations,
          it is much less powerful than overcoming learned connections as they’re
          occurring.
               Of course, we can extend the power of exposure by shifting from
          imagery-based work to actual trading. Typically I’ll have a trader start trad-
          ing small size at first while engaging in the deep breathing and concentra-
          tion and implementing trading plans. While the trade is on, the trader keeps
          her biofeedback readings in the optimal range and rehearses the plan for
          that trade. During the troublesome retracements, the trader simply repeats
          what she had practiced in the imagery: staying focused on the trading plan
          and keeping physically calm through the regular, deep breathing. Once this
          process is successful with small trades, the trader can gradually increase
          size back to the normal level of risk, performing the biofeedback work at
          each new size level.

              Utilize biofeedback during trading and you can often detect
              departures from the performance zone before you are consciously
              aware of them.
