P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          88                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          A worthwhile exercise is to expand on the routine from my recent trade
          and vividly visualize the worst-case scenarios for trades that you place. In
          other words, once you set your stop level, visualize how you would feel
          and how you would respond in that worst-case scenario. Most importantly,
          figure out what your next course of action might be, including your pos-
          sible next trade. In other words, mentally rehearse the resilient behavior
          that you want to cultivate. You can think of this as play-acting the role of a
          highly resilient person. As you rehearse resilience and act on the rehearsal,
          that role becomes more a part of you. To paraphrase Nietzsche, you’re find-
          ing your greatness by play-acting your ideal.


               In trading, we develop ourselves. Every gain is an opportunity to
               overcome greed and overconfidence. Every loss is an opportunity
               to build resilience.


               Beware: resiliency does not mean that you jump into subsequent
          trades after you sustain losing ones. Rather, the resilient trader is one
          who can sustain well-being even after normal, expectable losing trades.
          When you lack resilience, you become backward-looking and respond to
          the last trade rather than the next market development. The resilient trader
          remains proactive, even in the face of loss. A resilient trader might thus
          stop trading or resume trading following a loss; it’s the following of basic,
          time-tested plans and strategies—and not impulsively running toward or
          away from risk—that defines authentic resilience.



                      COACHING CUE

          If I ask a trader how well he is doing and I receive a dollar ﬁgure as a reply,
          I usually know there’s a problem afoot. Experienced traders think of their re-
          turns in percentage terms, not absolute dollars. Thus, for example, they might
          think of cutting their risk if they’re down 5 percent on the year or limit their
          risk on a trade to 25 basis points (0.25 percent of their portfolio value). If you
          calibrate yourself in dollar terms, you will ﬁnd it diﬃcult to increase your trad-
          ing size or to get larger as you grow your portfolio. Standardize your view in
          percentage terms and you make yourself more resilient; a $20,000 loss on a
          $2,000,000 portfolio won’t feel signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from a $500 loss on a
          $50,000 portfolio. Similarly, when you cut your trading size, you’ll standardize
          your risk management if you’re calibrated by percentages, rather than let losses
          run because they seem small in absolute dollar terms.
