P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          288                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          setups were less important than the work that went into implementing
          them. “Once again,” he notes, “I found it was the research and not the trad-
          ing that made me the money.”
               In Rob’s third phase of research, he has formally back-tested his trad-
          ing ideas, using Excel and TradeStation as primary tools. This back-testing
          has enabled him to generate actionable trade ideas. As he puts it, “I love
          taking these trades because I have a good idea of my success rate and
          profitability expectation going in.” Reviewing a variety of price, breadth,
          volume, sentiment, and other indicator data helps him develop a view on
          markets, but it also “helps me to unveil what is truth and what is lore with
          regards to conventional market wisdom. There is so much information out
          there. It’s difficult to know what’s valuable and what information is sim-
          ply hype . . . There is great value in being able to test ideas and understand
          what indicators and setups actually provide a quantifiable edge, and what
          ones don’t.”


              Much conventional trading wisdom does not stand the scrutiny of
              objective analysis.


               For Rob, research has been his source of edge. “Whether my focus
          has been day trading, intermediate-term momentum trading, or quantita-
          tive swing trading,” he explains, “I have consistently found that it’s been
          the nightly research that has facilitated my growth as a trader more than
          anything . . . The ideas are all constructed at night. Market hours are sim-
          ply used for executing those ideas. Research (stock screening and chart-
          ing), research (quantitative analysis), and research (results analysis) are
          the three things I’ve found most helpful in coaching myself as a trader.”
               What I most like about Rob’s perspective is that it highlights the rel-
          evance of research for every kind of trader, not just those that trade me-
          chanical systems. Rob has tested and traded setups, but he also has treated
          himself—and his trading—as a subject for study. When Rob identified the
          ideas that work best for him, he has been able to maximize opportunity and
          eliminate the hunches and market lore that cost him money.
               Jeff Miller approaches markets differently from Rob, but his per-
          spectives on self-mentoring are surprisingly similar. “The most impor-
          tant thing—by far—in my trading is having a system and/or method,” he
          stresses. “Without a system in which you have confidence, you are adrift.
          You second-guess yourself on every occasion. This leads to selling winners
          too soon, holding on to losers too long, and many other errors. You need to
          know that your basic method works. If you really understand and believe
          this, you can focus on making the correct decisions, which may not always
          be the winning decisions.”
