P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                        149

          trade ideas and trading results completely freely. In such an environment,
          the group members could cross-fertilize each other’s views, support one
          another during difficult periods, and learn from one another. A particularly
          valuable function within such a group would be peer mentoring, similar to
          the mutual assistance within Alcoholics Anonymous.

              StockTickr (www.stocktickr.com) has been active in facilitating
              trading groups and communities, with an eye toward improving
              performance.

               Even if you just find one or two supportive peers to share ideas and
          results with, you’ve taken an important step to create a fresh, interpersonal
          context for the changes you’re trying to make. If you choose your peers
          wisely, they will challenge you, support you, learn from you, and teach you.
          Because you value them and don’t want to let them down, you’ll be more
          likely to stick to your preparation, discipline, and goals.
               A little-appreciated piece of psychological wisdom is to find social
          contexts to be the person (trader) you want to be. Over time, the feedback
          and responses from others will mirror the best of you to you and that ideal
          self will become an increasing part of you. When you’re your own trading
          coach, you don’t need to do everything yourself. A cardinal principle under-
          lying the psychodynamic framework is that the best changes are the result
          of powerful, emotional relationship experiences.
               Your assignment is to find just one person to be part of your team:
          someone whose developmental efforts you can support, and someone
          who will support your own. Out of that relationship may spring many
          more—a network of dedicated professionals mentoring and motivating
          each other. When you turn trading into a relationship experience, you gain
          role models, become a role model, learn from others, and benefit from
          teaching others. You add fresh ways to experience your strengths, even as
          you build on them.


                     COACHING CUE

          Online trading rooms are excellent venues for meeting like-minded traders,
          and they can be powerful learning tools. Several long-standing ones are Linda
          Bradford Raschke’s trading room, which emphasizes technical trading across
          multiple markets (www.lbrgroup.com); the Market Proﬁle–oriented Institute of
          Auction Market Theory room run by Bill Duryea (www.instituteofauctionmarket
          theory.com); and the trading room run by John Carter and Hubert Senters (www.
          tradethemarkets.com). Also take a look at the Market Proﬁle–related educational
          programs run by Jim Dalton and Terry Liberman (www.marketsinrproﬁle.com)
          as possible venues for connecting with like-minded traders. Two well-known
