P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009    15:45     Printer: Yet to come




         Preface                                                                     xv


         particularly helpful for those who learn best by seeing and hearing ideas.
         Once publishing becomes electronic, there’s no reason that every text can’t
         be a multimedia learning experience.
              You’ll notice from the table of contents that each of the 10 chapters
         contains 10 lessons. Those chapters cover a range of topics relevant to
         trading psychology and trading performance, including specific lessons for
         utilizing psychodynamic, cognitive, and behavioral brief therapy methods
         to change problematic behavior patterns and instill new, positive ones.
         The final two chapters are especially unique: Chapter 9 consists of self-
         coaching perspectives from 18 successful trading professionals who share
         their work online. Chapter 10 fulfills a long-standing promise to Trader-
         Feed readers, walking traders through the basics of identifying historical
         patterns using Excel. Each lesson is accompanied by homework activities
         and suggestions (“Coaching Cues”) to help with application of the ideas.
         Major ideas are set apart within the text for quick review and scanning. At
         the end of each chapter is a list of resources to guide your further inquiry
         into the book’s topics and ideas.
              Yes, the aim of the book is to help you become your own trading coach,
         but a glance at the chapter and lesson titles reveals that the broader pur-
         pose is to help you coach yourself through life. The challenges and uncer-
         tainties we face in trading—the pursuit of rewards in the face of risks—are
         just as present in careers and relationships as in markets. Techniques that
         help you master yourself as a trader will serve you well in any field of en-
         deavor. In that sense, the goal is not just to make money in the markets, it
         is to prosper in all of life’s undertakings. I will be gratified and honored if
         this book is a resource toward your own prosperity, in and out of financial
         markets.

                                                                 B RETT S TEENBARGER
