P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          108                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          they compete against markets: most of all they compete against them-
          selves. They derive pride and validation, not just from making money, but
          also from getting better, which is what keeps successful traders in the game
          long after they could have retired comfortably.
              The lesser traders? They trade to not lose; they trade to keep their jobs.
          They don’t hunger to become more than they are; they want to do well, not
          to be their best.


              The drive for self-improvement is different from the desire to make
              money and is far more rare.

               These successful traders can sustain their drive by staying mindful of
          the costs of their negative patterns and the benefits of their positive ones.
          When a successful trader decides to avoid a particular trade or market,
          it’s often because of a specific recollection that this idea has caused past
          losses. By staying emotionally connected to the pain created by their worst
          trading, traders stoke their motivation to avoid trading mistakes. Similarly,
          knowing their strengths is not just an abstract awareness for successful
          traders, but an emotional connection to the pride and sense of accomplish-
          ment over doing well.
               A best practice in self-coaching—and a great assignment for this
          lesson—is to not only summarize the patterns of your best and worst
          trading, but to actually write down and visualize the costs associated
          with the most negative trading patterns and the benefits that accom-
          pany the best patterns. In other words, you don’t finish your journaling
          until you achieve a state in which you are emotionally connected to the
          things you are writing about. You will want to change your negative pat-
          terns when you get to the point of hating those patterns and becoming dis-
          gusted with the ways in which they’ve set you back. You’ll want to build on
          your positive patterns when you see and feel their benefits. When you’re
          coaching yourself well, journaling is an emotional exercise, not merely a
          cognitive one.
               There is little to be gained from abstract positive thinking. Reciting
          such affirmations as, “I will be a successful trader” is empty at best, self-
          delusional at worst. The reason such positive thinking doesn’t work is
          that it is not connected to the day-to-day conduct of your trading. It’s not
          enough to simply make yourself feel good, and, indeed, there can be real
          value in feeling so bad that you’ll never repeat a mistake again. What is
          helpful is to associate the best emotional experiences of trading—your
          greatest moments of joy and achievement—with the specific practices that
          brought you such happiness. It is also tremendously helpful to re-create the
          pain of your worst trading with concrete vows to never go there again.
