P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          234                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          purchase a roaster, and rent space in a well-trafficked area. You furnish
          the café attractively and purchase all the cups, saucers, and utensils you
          will need. Altogether you sink $100,000 into your new enterprise, which
          is loaned from a bank with your home as collateral. Your average cost to
          serve a cup of coffee, just based on materials and labor expenses alone,
          is 50 cents. At $1.50 per cup, you’re making a dollar for each cup you sell.
          At 300 customers per day, that’s $300 per day or about $90,000 per year.
          That doesn’t leave you with much to take as a salary once you pay off your
          overhead.
               In this scenario, you can only make a go of the business by increas-
          ing the number of customers coming to the café, by increasing the average
          expenditure per customer, or both. So let’s say you try to increase the aver-
          age check size per customer by adding something additional to the menu.
          In addition to coffee, you now also serve tea.
               Unfortunately, this doesn’t help your business greatly. A few more cus-
          tomers enter the café who are tea drinkers, but few customers order both
          coffee and tea. As a result, you’ve increased your overhead (for tea equip-
          ment and supplies), but haven’t greatly added to the bottom line. Tea over-
          laps coffee too much to add much to the menu; it doesn’t really diversify
          the offerings of your café.
               Suppose, however, you add pastries to the menu, sourcing them from
          a local bakery. Now you find that many people interested in your coffee
          also like a pastry to go with their drinks; this increases the size of their
          checks and enables you to make profits from two sources instead of one:
          the beverage and the pastry. You also now attract people who are inter-
          ested in a snack or who just want a bite to eat after a concert or theater.
          The increased traffic also adds to the bottom line.
               What has happened is that you’ve made your business more diversi-
          fied. You have multiple profit centers, not just one. If you offered evening
          entertainment, sandwiches, and breakfast items, you would be even more
          diversified. Instead of attracting 300 patrons per day at one dollar each,
          you might attract 800 a day at $2.50 each. With $2,000 a day of gross in-
          come after labor and materials costs, you now have the basis for a thriving
          business. Moreover, should a café open elsewhere in the neighborhood,
          your business will be protected because of its other unique offerings.


              Diversification leverages talent.


               The same business principles that impact the viability of the café ap-
          ply to trading. When you trade different markets, time frames, and patterns,
          you generate multiple potential profit sources. This protects you when mar-
          kets shift and place any single idea or pattern into drawdown mode. It also
