P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          291

          valuable views on analyzing markets, executing trades, and developing
          trading systems. He is keenly aware of the importance of skill development
          and psychology to the evolution of traders.
               When I asked Ray for the three things that have most contributed to his
          self-coaching, his number one factor was attitudes. Among the attitudes he
          views as essential to trading success are:

              Honesty
              Ray defines this as “the value of never consciously faking reality. If
              there is one trait that has proven critical to my success and to the suc-
              cess of my students, it has been this one. Successful students are bru-
              tally honest with themselves. Failed students tend to provide excuses
              and rationalizations for their failures.”

              Responsibility
              “I learned to take full responsibility for my successes and failures,” Ray
              explains. “With successes, my question is: How can I repeat this? With
              failures, my question is: What can I learn from this?”

              Tenacity
              “I’ll do whatever is necessary to achieve my goals,” Ray emphasizes.
              “This includes constant learning by first learning the material, then
              adapting it to suit my needs. I notice that failed students tend to re-
              sist the material whenever that leads outside their comfort zones.”


              Learning requires a willingness to venture outside one’s comfort
              zone to see and do things in new ways.


              Discipline
              Ray stresses, “I am disciplined enough to write out my trading rules
              and execute the rules consistently. I am disciplined enough to keep my
              psychological and equity journals so that I can learn from my trades.
              And I am disciplined enough to celebrate my successes and take time
              from the markets to recharge.”

              Citing Linda Bradford Raschke, who has mentored many traders over
          the years through her online trading room, seminars, and books, Ray
          Barros stresses that coaching is only valuable if its insights are imple-
          mented by traders in their 3-Rs: routines, research, and reviews.
