P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          263


               I’ve observed this interdisciplinary cross-fertilization among many suc-
          cessful traders. Those traders with mathematical backgrounds learn to
          quantify value and divergences from value. Those with athletic training use
          their experience to guide their training and direct their competitive drive.
          My own work in psychology has sensitized me to the ways in which human
          behavior is patterned. This work has been a tremendous aid in recogniz-
          ing similar patterns in markets. Coaching yourself begins with knowing
          yourself, and especially knowing your distinctive strengths: how you best
          process information, how you think, what you love. It is difficult to imagine
          being successful at trading if your market activity does not tap into these
          core competencies and values.
               Finally, Henry identifies collaboration and a strong work ethic as key to
          his self-development. “A diverse network of people with broad and similar
          interests in trading both pushed and supported me,” Henry explains. “The
          very strong work ethic I got from my grandfather always makes me do just
          a little bit more.” The keys here are that the network is diverse—providing
          input from many angles to aid creativity—and the network is both chal-
          lenging and supportive. I’ve often been asked why I don’t charge money for
          my blog content. The answer is that, in developing a community of read-
          ers, I also cultivate the diverse network described by Henry. Readers push
          me to think more deeply about markets, and they support my efforts at
          learning more. All of us tend to fall into the trap of operating within our
          comfort zones. We benefit when those who care about us also push us to
          move beyond those self-imposed boundaries.
               Like many successful creative individuals, Henry exemplifies what I
          call an open source approach to networking. When others share ideas and
          research with him, he freely passes his work on to them. This approach is
          very common among professional portfolio managers, particularly the suc-
          cessful ones. A surprising number of traders, however, are convinced that
          they must keep their work secret. The result is that they become isolated
          and stagnant. “When a colleague sends me something that I build upon or
          that sets me off on a new and interesting direction, I always try to recipro-
          cate with a relevant finding or study as way of thanks,” Henry points out.
          “What I give up in secrecy comes back many-fold in strong relationships
          and flow of ideas that are the lifeblood of the creator.”

              The trader must be a creator if his business is to avoid stagnation.

              I cannot emphasize this latter point strongly enough: as a trader, you
          are only as strong as your flow of ideas. Those ideas are your lifeblood: the
          novel mutations that will enable you to evolve and adapt to changing mar-
          ket conditions. Success in trading is a kind of evolution; without creativity
