P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger        December 29, 2008    13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                  223


              If there are challenging market situations, the best approach to master
          them is to face them directly while you stay grounded in your best trad-
          ing practices. With the use of imagery, this conditioning work can be ac-
          complished outside of market hours and without taking risks. With repeti-
          tion, the mentally rehearsed patterns feel increasingly natural, as the old,
          learned connections fall away. It is not always comfortable doing exposure
          work—and the better you do it, the less comfortable it will be—but you
          cannot coach yourself through discomfort unless you’re willing and able to
          tackle it directly. Rehearse your best trading practices while you’re in your
          most stressful situations; it is one of the most effective training techniques
          you can employ.

                        COACHING CUE

          It is helpful to formulate your best trading practices as speciﬁc, concrete rules
          so that these rules can be rehearsed in detail during the exposure work. Among
          the rules I’ve found most helpful for this work are:
            r Generating trading ideas by identifying themes that cut across sectors
              and/or asset classes.
            r Waiting for pullbacks in a trend before entering a position.
            r Establishing my target price at the outset of the trade, so that I can enter
              the trade with a proﬁt potential that exceeds the loss I’m willing to take.
            r Sizing my trade so that I’m risking a ﬁxed, small percentage of my portfolio
              value on the idea.
            r Adding to longer-term trades on pullbacks after they have gone my way
              and remain proﬁtable.
            r Exiting trades on my planned stop-loss points or at my designated proﬁt
              target.

               Trading rules will diﬀer for each trader depending on their markets and
          trading style. The important thing is to know what you do when you are most
          successful, so that you can cement these positive patterns, even as you expose
          yourself to challenging trading conditions.




          LESSON 70: A BEHAVIORAL
          FRAMEWORK FOR DEALING
          WITH WORRY

          We hear a great deal about fear and greed, and all of us have experienced
          bouts of overconfidence and frustration. On a day-in and day-out basis,
          however, few problems are as thorny for traders as worry.
