P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          314                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          understanding of spreadsheets (how cells are named, how to copy infor-
          mation and paste it into cells, how to copy data from one cell to another,
          how to create a chart of the data in a sheet, how to write simple formulas
          into cells), you’ll need a beginning text for Excel users. All of the things
          we’ll be reviewing here are true basics; we won’t be using workbooks link-
          ing multiple sheets, and we won’t be writing complex macros. Everything
          you need to formulate straightforward hypotheses from market data can
          be accomplished with these basics.
               So let’s get started. Your first step in searching for market patterns
          and themes is to download your historical data into Excel. Your data ven-
          dors will have instructions for downloading data; generally this will in-
          volve copying the data from the charting application or from the data ven-
          dors’ servers and pasting them into Excel. If, for instance, you were using
          e-Signal (www.esignal.com) as a real-time data/charting application, you
          would activate the chart of the data you’re interested in by clicking on that
          chart. You then click on the menu item Tools and then click on the option
          for Data Export. A spreadsheet-like screen will pop up with the chart data
          included. Along the very top row, you can check the boxes for the data ele-
          ments you want in your spreadsheet. If there are data in the chart that you
          don’t need for your pattern search, you simply uncheck the boxes for those
          columns.
               On that spreadsheet screen in e-Signal, if you click on the button for
          Copy to Clipboard, you will place all of the selected data on the Windows
          clipboard, where the data elements are stored as alphanumeric text. You
          then open a blank sheet in Excel, click on the Excel menu item for Edit,
          and select the option for Paste. That will place the selected data into your
          Excel spreadsheet.
               If you had wanted more historical data than popped up in the e-Signal
          spreadsheet-like screen, you would have to click your chart and drag your
          mouse to the right, moving view of the data into the past. Move it back as
          far as you need and then go through the process of clicking on Tools, se-
          lecting Data Export, etc. If you need more historical data than e-Signal (or
          your current charting/data vendor) carries on their servers, that’s when
          you’ll need to subscribe to a dedicated historical data source such as
          Pinnacle Data (www.pinnacledata.com).

              If you need data going back many years for multiple indicators or
              instruments, you’ll want to download data from a historical data
              vendor who has checked the data for completeness and accuracy.

               If you’re using Pinnacle Data, you can automatically update your en-
          tire database daily with its Goweb application. The program places all the
          updated data into Excel sheets that are stored on the C drive in a folder
