P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          35

          experiment. We had two groups of subjects deliver a speech. Both groups
          received negative feedback about their performance. The first group was
          told that speaking ability was linked to personality and could not be
          changed. The second group was told that they could improve their speak-
          ing skills relatively easily. At the end of the session, the first group reported
          significantly more distress than the second group. It wasn’t getting the
          negative feedback that generated distress; it was the perception that they
          were not competent to change the negative situation.


              Our interpretations of situations turn normal stress into distress.

               So how does this relate to trading? When you put your capital at risk,
          you’re like the driver on the snowy road. You will be alert, processing in-
          formation in real time to make quick mid-course corrections if needed. If
          you view losing as a natural part of trading, have experienced and bounced
          back from losses before, and have mechanisms in place to limit your losses,
          stress is unlikely to become distress. The losing trade is a mere annoyance,
          like having your trip delayed by a snowstorm.
               If, however, you don’t accept losing as normal and natural—and espe-
          cially if you don’t have position size limits and stop-loss levels in place to
          control your losses—the stress of a trade going against you is more apt to
          become distress. Your ability to focus and make those rapid mid-course
          corrections will become impaired. You’ll be like the Florida driver in the
          Northeast snowstorm.
               Position size limits, trading plans, and stop-loss levels are like snow
          tires on your vehicle: they may not seem to do a lot for you when things
          are going well, but they certainly help you deal with adverse conditions.
          A panicky driver in the snow doesn’t feel that he can control his car; an ex-
          perienced winter driver knows that he can. Similarly, the panicked trader
          feels unable to control losses; the experienced trader knows that losses
          can always be limited.
               Your challenge as your own trading coach is to embrace stress—and
          always ensure that it does not become distress. A fantastic goal to work
          on for your trading is to start the day with position sizing guidelines, per-
          trade loss limits, per-trade price targets, and daily loss limits that you can
          readily live with. The amount of risk you’re willing to take on each trade
          should be meaningfully smaller than the reward potential built into your
          profit targets. The amount of money you’re willing to lose each day should
          be a fraction of the money you make on your best days. If you’re a fre-
          quent trader, no single loss on a trade should prevent you from making
          money on the day; no single daily loss should be so large that you can’t be
          profitable on the week. Preparation and familiarity keep stress from be-
          coming distress, because they enhance your sense of control. If you plan
