P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          333


               For this investigation, we’ll examine half-hourly data for the S&P 500
          emini contract. I obtain my intraday data from my quote platforms; in the
          current example, I’ll use e-Signal. To do this, we create a 30-minute chart
          of the ES futures contract; click on the chart and scroll to the right to move
          the chart backward in time. When we’ve covered the last 20 days or so,
          we click on the menu item Tools; select Data Export; then uncheck the
          boxes for the data that we won’t need. In this case, all we’ll need is Date,
          Time, and Volume. We click the button for Copy to Clipboard and open a
          fresh sheet in Excel. Once we click on the Excel menu item for Edit and
          select Paste, with the cursor at cell A2, we’ll populate the sheet with the
          intraday data. We can then enter names for the columns in row 1: Date;
          Time; and Volume. (If you’re downloading from e-Signal, those names will
          accompany the data and you can download the data with the cursor at A1).
               Our next step is to highlight the entire data set that we want to cover.
          We click on the Excel menu item for Data; select Filter; and select AutoFil-
          ter. A set of small arrows will appear beside the column names. Click the
          arrow next to Time and, from the drop down menu, select the time that rep-
          resents the start of the trading day. In my case, living in the Chicago area in
          Central Time, that would be 8:30 A . M . You’ll then see all the volume figures
          for the half-hour 8:30 A . M . to 9:00 A . M . Click on Edit; select Copy; open a
          blank sheet; click on Edit; and select Paste. This will put the 8:30 A . M . data
          on a separate sheet. If you have 20 values (the past 20 days), you can enter
          the formula “=average(c2:c21)” and you’ll see the average trading volume
          for the first half-hour of trading. Of course, you can filter for any time of
          day and see that half-hour’s average volume as well.


              When you know the average trading volume for a particular
              time period, you can assess institutional participation in real
              time—particularly with respect to whether this volume picks up
              or slows down as a function of market direction.

               The filter function is helpful when you want to pull out data selectively
          from a data set. Let’s say, for instance, that you had a column in which you
          coded Mondays as 1; Tuesday’s as 2; etc. You could then filter out the 1s
          in the historical data set and see how the market behaved specifically on
          Mondays. Similarly, you could code the first or last days of the month and
          filter the data to observe the returns associated with those.
               In general, I find filtering most helpful for intraday analyses, when I
          want to see how markets behave at a particular time of day under particu-
          lar conditions. Frankly, however, this is not where I find the greatest edges
          typically, and it’s not where I’d recommend that a beginner start with
          historical investigations. Should you become serious about investigating
