P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          319

          now that you have two Y-axes: one for the Market Index price data and
          one for the Mining Stock data. You’ll be able to see their relative ups and
          downs much more clearly. Click on OK and you will see your new chart.
          If you’d like the Y-axes to have new labels, you can place your cursor on
          the center of the chart (away from the lines for the data) and right click.
          A menu will pop up, and you’ll select Chart Options. That will give you a
          screen enabling you to type in new labels for the Value (Y) axis (at left)
          and the Second value (Y) axis (at right).
               If you right click on either of the two lines in the chart and, from the
          pop-up menu select Format Data Series, you’ll see a tab for Patterns. You
          can click the arrow beside the option for Weight and make the line thicker.
          You can click the arrow beside the option for Color and change the color
          of the line.
               If you right-click on the X- or Y-axes, you’ll get a pop-up menu; click on
          Format Axis. If you select the tab for Font, you can choose the typeface,
          font style, and size of the print for the axis labels. If you select the tab for
          Scale, you can change the range of values for the axis. With a little practice,
          you can customize the look of your charts.
               So what does your chart tell you? You can see that the Mining Stock is
          not moving in unison with the Market Index. When the index shows large
          rises or declines, the stock is tending to move in the opposite direction. By
          itself, over such a short period, that won’t tell you anything you’d want to
          hang your hat on, but it does raise interesting questions:
            r Why is the mining stock moving opposite to the market index? Might
              the mining stock be moving in unison with the gold market instead?
            r If the mining stock is moving with gold, is gold also moving opposite to
              the market index? If so, why might that be? Might there be a common
              influence on both of them: the strength of the U.S. dollar?
            r Does this relationship occur over intraday time frames? Might we be
              able to identify some buy or sell signals in the mining stock when we
              see selling or buying in the broad market?


              Reviewing charts that you create helps you see intermarket and
              intramarket relationships.


               Many times, investigating relationships through charts leads you to
          worthwhile questions, which may then lead you to interesting and prof-
          itable trading ideas. The key is asking “Why?” What might be responsible
          for the relationship I am observing? Remember, in your own self-coaching,
          you want to be generating hypotheses, and there is no better way than plain
          old brainstorming. When you can actually see how the data are related to
