P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          266                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Having an Edge
              “Without an edge you are doomed,” Chris asserts. “Very simple. Of
              course you might throw a coin and trade a 50:50 chance system. But
              only a professional will have the discipline to stick to the necessary
              money management rules to trade a 50:50 system successfully. Hav-
              ing an edge means you can statistically prove that your trading system
              works, that it would have paid your commissions and costs of doing
              business and made you profits in the long run. You might be a mechan-
              ical trader, you might trade fundamentals, you might trade price action
              or some arcane indicator or a combination of all of them. It all comes
              down to one thing only: You must be able to prove to yourself that your
              trading system works and will make you profits in the long run. If you
              can’t prove that to yourself, if you don’t understand the mechanics be-
              hind your trading system, then you won’t trust your trading system and
              you will not be able to trade it. The best trading system will produce
              losses in the hands of a trader who does not believe that that trading
              system works.”

              I Alone Am Responsible
              “I came to trading because I came into real financial difficulties after
              some clients of mine went bankrupt and did not pay their bills” Chris
              recounts. “Trading seemed the solution to me, because only trading
              gave me the promise of instant payment, of knowing that when I did
              it right I would get paid. But that promise came with a responsibility I
              did not fully understand: I alone am responsible for any action taken.
              There is no one but me to blame, if I have a red day, a red week, a
              red month or year. Each and every day I can look back and tell you
              where I was wrong, what trade I should have taken, where I missed
              the opportunity to make it back. It’s only me who is responsible. And
              if I alone am responsible, then there can’t be any guru to whom I can
              turn to tell me what to do. I trade my system. I can tell you what I
              do, but whether you will be able to use that knowledge depends on
              you alone.”


              The need for a guru confesses an absence of self-guidance.


              There Is No Holy Grail
              “The charts of the best traders have price bars only or they trade with-
              out charts at all, like many forex traders,” Chris explains. “They are not
