P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          329

          column I. I would then copy the spreadsheet to a fresh sheet and sort the
          data based on column H, so that we’d separate the 1s from the 0s. We’d
          then examine the column I sum for the cells in column H that were 1s and
          compare with the column I sum for the cells in column H that were 0s.
               Dummy coding is especially helpful if we want to examine the impact
          of events on prospective returns. For instance, we could code all Mondays
          with a 1; all Tuesdays with a 2, etc., and then sort the next day’s return
          based on the codings to tell us whether returns were more or less favorable
          following particular days of the week. Coding is also useful when we want
          to set up complex conditions among two or more independent variables
          and examine their relationship to future returns. This kind of coding gets a
          bit more complex and will form the basis for the next lesson.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you include volume in your spreadsheet, you can code days with rising volume
          with a 1 and days with falling volume with a 0. This would then allow you to
          compare next day returns as a function of whether today’s rise or decline were
          on rising or falling volume. All you’d need to do is sort the data once based on
          the current day’s price change and then a second time separately for the rising
          and falling occasions as a function of the rising and declining volume.




          LESSON 98: EXAMINE CONTEXT

          Philosopher Stephen Pepper coined the term contextualism to describe a
          worldview in which truth is a function of the context in which knowledge
          is embedded. A short-term price pattern might have one set of expectations
          in a larger bull market; quite another under bear conditions. A short-term
          reversal in the first hour of trading has different implications than one that
          occurs midday. To use an example from The Psychology of Trading, you
          understand Bear right! one way on the highway, quite another way in the
          Alaskan wilderness.
               We can code market data for contexts and then investigate patterns
          specific to those contexts. What we’re really asking is, “Under the set of
          conditions that we find at present, what is the distribution of future expec-
          tations?” We’re not pretending that these will be universal expectations.
          Rather, they are contextual—applicable to our current situation.

              Many of the most fruitful trading hypotheses pertain to certain
              kinds of markets—not to all markets, all the time.
