P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          94                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              As your own trading coach, it’s important that you instill both trust and
          confidence in your trading. This can be accomplished in two ways:

            r Instill the confident mindset. Before trading starts, you want to
              mentally rehearse how you would talk to yourself in the event that you
              have to scratch a trade after having a paper profit. Specifically, you
              would rehearse a mindset of “nothing ventured, nothing gained”—it’s
              okay to scratch a smaller percentage of trades if that allows you to let
              a larger percentage run—rather than a self-blaming, frustrated mind-
              set. Prepare yourself in advance for adverse excursions so you remove
              much of their threat value.
            r Build on small change. A useful brief therapy principle is to start
              making large changes by just starting with small changes. If you do just
              a little of the right thing, you will provide the feedback and encourage-
              ment necessary to expand those efforts. In the case of trading, this is
              easy: even if you take much of your position off ahead of a planned
              target, leave a small piece of the position on to either hit the target
              or scratch out. This preserves profits and assuages risk-aversion while
              it enables you to have the firsthand experience of seeing your ideas
              through to their conclusion. Over time, you can leave on larger pieces
              and build performance that way.

               Confidence is not just a function of how you think, but also how you
          act. If you act in a way to trust your judgment, you’ll have the opportunity
          to see your judgment work out—and that will build confidence. The stop-
          profit scenario, unfortunately, is a stop-confidence one as well. If you act
          with confidence—even in small measure—you coach yourself to self-trust
          and a deeper internalization of that confidence.



                     COACHING CUE

          The ﬂip side of the impulsive trader is the perfectionist. I’ve seen many traders
          come up with great trade ideas, only to never participate in them because the
          market never came to their desired entry levels. Coming up with a big, win-
          ning idea and then seeing it work out without you on board can be supremely
          frustrating. Don’t let the perfect become the enemy of the good. If you have a
          fantastic idea—for instance, you see a market break out and enter a trending
          mode—get on board with at least a small piece of your maximum position size.
          If it’s a good trend, you can always add to the position later on countertrend
          moves; if it’s not a good trend, you can exit with a modest loss. But always
          try to let your trading positions express your convictions: you always beneﬁt
          psychologically when you act on your conﬁdence.
