P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21   Printer: Yet to come




          316                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          earliest data are in row 2 and the later data fall underneath. I save row 1
          for data labels, so that each column is labeled clearly: DATE, OPEN, HIGH,
          LOW, CLOSE, etc. You’ll see why this labeling is helpful when we get to the
          process of sorting the data.
               Here are some simple statistical functions that I use frequently to ex-
          amine data in a qualitative way. Each example assumes that we’re investi-
          gating the data in column C, from cells 1 through 10:

            r =median(C2:C11) – The median value for the data in the formula.
            r =max(C2:C11) – The largest value for the data in the formula.
            r =min(C2:C11) – The smallest value for the data in the formula.
            r =stdev(C2:C11) – The standard deviation for the data in the formula.
            r =correl(C2:C11,D2:D11) – The correlation between the data in colu-
              mns C and D, cells 1–10.

               Much of the time, our analyses won’t be of the raw data, but will be of
          the changes in the data from period to period. The formula =(C3-C2) gives
          the difference from cell C2 to cell C3. If we want to express this differ-
          ence as a percentage (so that we’re analyzing percent price changes from
          period to period), the formula would read = ((C3-C2)/C2)* 100. This takes
          the difference of cells C3 and C2 as a proportion of the initial value (C2),
          multiplied by 100 to give a percentage.
               When we want to update later cells with the percentage difference in-
          formation, we don’t need to rewrite the formulas. Instead, as noted above,
          we click on the cell with the formula, click on the Excel menu item Edit,
          click on copy, then left click the cell below the one with the formula and
          drag down as far as we want the data. The spreadsheet will calculate price
          changes for each of the time periods that you selected by dragging. This
          means that if you save your formulas into worksheets, updating your data is
          as simple as downloading the fresh data from your vendor, pasting into the
          appropriate cells in your sheets, and copying the data from formulas for the
          cells representing the new data period. Once you’ve organized your sheets
          in this manner, it thus only takes a few minutes a day to completely update.

              Once you create a spreadsheet with the appropriate formulas, up-
              dating your analyses is mostly a matter of pasting and copying. As
              a result, you can update many analyses in just a few minutes.

               Once again, the basic formulas, arrangement of rows and columns, and
          copying of data will take some practice before you move on to actual analy-
          ses. I strongly encourage you to become proficient with downloading your
          data from your vendor/application and manipulating the data in Excel with
          copying, pasting, and formula writing before moving on. Once you have
