P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              241

          sorry to inform you that such items as equity curve, average numbers of
          winning/losing trades, and average size of winning/losing trades are just
          a start to serious scorekeeping. Professional traders at many firms obtain
          much more information than that about their performance. Access to ded-
          icated risk-management resources is one of the great advantages of work-
          ing in such firms. Although it is unlikely that you could duplicate the output
          of a dedicated risk manager, it is possible to drill down further into your
          trading to uncover patterns that will aid your self-coaching.
               In this lesson, we’ll focus on one specific advanced application of met-
          rics that can greatly enhance your efforts at performance improvement:
          tracking results across your markets and/or types of trades. This tracking
          will tell you, not only how well you’re doing, but also which trading is most
          contributing to and limiting your results.

              Of the different types of trades that you place, which most con-
              tribute to your profits? These are the drivers of your trading busi-
              ness success.

               We’ve already seen how important it is for your trading to be diversi-
          fied. Among the forms of diversification commonly found are:
            r Trading different instruments, such as individual stocks versus index
              ETFs.
            r Trading different markets, such as crude oil futures and stock indexes.
            r Trading different setups, such as event trades and breakout trades.
            r Trading different times of day and/or different time frames.

                To truly understand your trading business, you want to tag each of your
          trades by the type of trade it represents. You will thus segregate trades
          based on the criteria above. All your overnight trades, for instance, will
          go in one bin; all your day trades in another. All our stock index trades will
          fall into one category; all our fixed income trades in another. If you’re a day
          trader, you may want to segregate trades by time of day, by sector traded,
          or even by stock name.
                Each of these categories is a product in your trading business. Each
          category is a potential profit center. When you think of your trading as
          a diversified business, you want to know how each of your products is
          contributing to your bottom line. Simply looking at your bottom line will
          mask important differences in results among your trades.
                In practice this means that the metrics discussed in the last section—
          equity curve; proportion of winning/losing trades; average size of win-
          ning/losing trades; win/loss per trade; and variability of returns—should be
          broken down for each portion of your trading business. My own trading,
