P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                        331


          As before, we’ll examine the average next day’s return by calculating the
          average for the cells in column H that are coded in column G as “1” and
          comparing that to the average for the cells in column H that are coded in
          column G as “0.”
               Thus, let’s say that there are 538 cells for up days; 383 of these
          are coded “1” in column G and 155 are coded “0.” You would compare
          “=average(H2:H384)” and “=average(H385:H539).” You could also code
          the cells in column H as either “1” or “0” in column I based on whether
          they are up or down “=if(H2>0,1,0)” and then compare “=sum(I2:I384)”
          and “=sum(I385:I539)” to see if there are notable differences in the num-
          ber of up days following up days in markets that are above and below their
          moving averages.
               Just for your curiosity, using cash S&P 500 data as the raw data, I found
          that the average next day change following an up day when we’re above the
          20-day moving average to be −0.04 percent; the average next day change
          following an up day when we’re below the 20-day moving average was
          −0.18 percent. This is a good example of a finding that doesn’t knock my
          socks off, but is suggestive. I would want to conduct other investigations of
          what happens after rising days in falling markets before generating trading
          hypotheses that would have me shorting strength in a broader downtrend.


              Many times you’ll see differences in the sorted data that are strong
              enough to warrant further investigation, but not strong enough to
              justify a trading hypothesis by itself.

               This combination of coding and sorting can create a variety of contex-
          tual views of markets. For example, if we type in, “=if(E21=max(E2:E21),
          1,0)” we can examine the context in which the current day is the highest
          price in the past 20 and see how that influences returns. If we include a
          second independent variable, such as the number of stocks making new
          52-week highs and lows, we can examine how markets behave when new
          highs exceed new lows versus when new lows exceed new highs. For in-
          stance, if new highs go into column F and new lows into column G, we
          can code for “=if(F21>G21,1,0” in column H, place our dependent mea-
          sure (perhaps the next day’s price change) in column I and sort based on
          the new high/low coding.
               As mentioned earlier, it is wise to not create too many contextual con-
          ditions, because you will wind up with a very small sample of occasions
          that fit your query, and generalization will be difficult. If you obtain fewer
          than 20 occasions that meet your criteria, you may need to relax those cri-
          teria or include fewer of them.
               As your own trading coach, you can utilize these contextual queries to
          see how markets behave under a variety of conditions. The movement of
