P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          328                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          length of the data; and then click Enter. The 0,1 dummy code will populate
          each of the column H cells.


              We want to know whether the independent variable is associated
              with greater frequency of up/down days, as well as the magnitudes
              of change across those days.

               Now we go through the same sorting procedure described in the previ-
          ous lesson. We highlight all the cells in the worksheet—including the new
          column H—and click Edit and Copy. We exit the spreadsheet, instructing
          Excel to save changes and to save the highlighted data. We open a new
          sheet; click Edit; click Paste; and all the spreadsheet data—again minus
          the formulas—will appear on the sheet. Once again we sort the data by
          column F (current day’s price change) in descending order, as described
          in the previous lesson. Again we divide the data in half and, below the
          last entry in column G, we type in “=average(g2:g500)” and, below that,
          “=average(g501:g999).”
               This, as noted in the previous lesson, shows us the magnitude of the
          average differences in next day’s returns when the current day is relatively
          strong (top half of price change) versus relatively weak (bottom half of the
          price change distribution).
               In column H, next to the cells for the two averages in column G, we
          enter the formula “=sum(H2:H500)” and, below that, “=sum(H501:H999).”
          This tells us how many up days occurred following relatively strong days
          in the market and how many up days occurred following relatively weak
          days. Because we’re splitting the data in half, we should see roughly equal
          numbers of up days in the two sums if the current day’s performance is
          not strongly related to the next day’s price change. On the other hand, if
          we see considerably fewer up days following the strong market days than
          following the weak ones, we might begin to entertain a hypothesis.
               If the average next day changes in column G look quite discrepant, but
          the number of winning days in the two conditions in column G are similar,
          that means that the odds of a winning day may not be significantly affected
          by the prior day’s return, but the size of that day might be affected. In
          general, I like to see clear differences in both criteria. Thus, if the average
          size of the next day’s return are higher following a falling day than a rising
          one and the odds of a rising day are higher, I’ll be most likely to use the
          observation to frame a possible market hypothesis.
               Note that we can dummy code independent variables as well. If, for
          example, I wanted to see whether an up or down day (independent vari-
          able) tended to be followed by an up or down day (dependent variable), I
          could code column F (current day’s price change) with a code as above in
          column H and also code column G (next day’s price change) identically in
