P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          184                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          my goal was to move him forward in his readiness for change by helping
          him highlight the costs of his ways of coping. In your own cognitive self-
          coaching, you are not simply reframing negative thought patterns posi-
          tively; you also will frame them in ways that summon your motivation for
          change. Earlier, I mentioned the value of viewing negative patterns as per-
          sonal enemies: this is an example of a reframing that afflicts our comfort.
               When I reframed his self-talk as a lack of confidence, the trader’s im-
          mediate response was to describe his mother. He loved her and felt close
          to her as a child, but said that she was overprotective. When other boys
          went out to play, she held him back, afraid he would into fights. She tried
          to dissuade him from dating later in life, because she thought that girls
          might “take advantage” of him. The trader explained, with some sadness,
          how he never had the opportunity to excel in sports despite early promise,
          because his mother worried about injuries.
               This response provided me with the opening to use the guided imagery
          method. I asked the trader to close his eyes and vividly imagine a situation
          in which he has made money early in the day and now is considering pack-
          ing it in for the day and sitting on his profits. I told him to imagine that the
          markets were moving and opportunity was present, but to visualize his
          mother saying to him everything he has been saying to himself during
          his risk-averse self-talk. He thus had to imagine his mother, with a wor-
          ried, overprotective look on her face, warning him to not trade, to not lose
          the money he made, to not get hurt in the markets.


              Personalizing a pattern you want to change can heighten your mo-
              tivation to change that pattern—and help you sustain that motiva-
              tion.

               Before we had finished the exercise, the trader opened his eyes and
          exclaimed, “Yuck!” The idea of being a little boy controlled by his mother
          disgusted him. “But isn’t that your mother talking,” I asked, “when you’re
          telling yourself to not lose your money, to not get hurt in trades? Isn’t that
          your Mom’s voice within you?”
               That reframing was what the trader needed to separate himself from
          his pattern. The last thing he wanted to do was repeat his overprotec-
          tive childhood. Whenever he felt uneasy about participating in a market
          with opportunity, he simply closed his eyes and visualized what his mother
          would say in that situation. That visualization gave him the motivation to
          push the negative thinking aside and act on his trading instincts.
               As I noted in The Psychology of Trading, most of us have someone in
          our past who we don’t like or who we associate with negative thoughts and
          influences. If you imagine your least favorite person—someone who was
          mean to you, who hated you, who was abusive to you—saying to you what
