P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          154                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               It is not unusual for traders to personalize markets. Sometimes we
          view markets as dangerous, as out to get us, as rigged games, as treasure
          chests, as playgrounds, or as complex puzzles. When we attribute human
          characteristics to markets, we have to ask ourselves why we choose some
          qualities over others. Just as I projected authority onto my therapist, we
          project the qualities we most struggle with onto markets. This is a kind
          of transference. If we’ve lived for years with the sense that no one listened
          to us, we now feel that markets are irrational and capricious. If we’ve felt
          that others have taken advantage of us, we may just focus our frustration
          on the market makers who manipulate markets to our detriment.
               The idea of transference suggests that what most frustrates us about
          markets is most likely to be something that has frustrated us in our
          past—and probably in relationships. In a very important sense, we have
          relationships to the markets we trade, and it’s not unusual for us to im-
          bue those relationships with the same qualities that bedevil our personal
          relationships. When we act out past patterns with current markets, we’re
          no longer responding to objective demand and supply; lost in our own pat-
          terns, we become blind to those of our markets.
               We can see examples of transference in our dealings with trading
          partners as well. Very often, how a trader interacts with me reflects how
          she is dealing with markets. Some traders will avoid interaction with me
          out of embarrassment due to recent losses. These same traders enact
          avoidant patterns in their trading, neglecting to limit losses, neglecting
          their preparation. Other traders take a helpless stance with me during
          coaching, almost begging to be spoon-fed answers rather than trying
          methods out for themselves. These same traders become passive in
          difficult markets, giving up readily, displaying little resilience after normal
          losses. One advantage of sharing your trading with a peer mentor or a
          group of like-minded traders is that you can monitor how you engage them
          and how they deal with you. Not infrequently, the patterns that show up in
          your dealings with traders will reflect the patterns you need to work on in
          your trading. Patterns of overconfidence, avoidance, rationalization—all
          come out in our social interactions.


              Your greatest shortcomings in dealing with relationships will find
              expression in markets.

               How do you view the markets you trade? What do you say about mar-
          kets when you’re most upset about trading? If you were to draw a picture
          of your markets or describe them to a nontrader, how would you depict
          them? A worthwhile assignment is to review your journal and track your
          self-talk for anything you might say to personalize markets and trading.
