P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          144                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          mastery. If you are highly competitive and achievement-oriented, ask
          yourself if you want to win your freedom of will or lose it to the repeti-
          tion of your past. The competitive soul does not want to lose and will fight
          an enemy to the death. A powerful aid to change is to use your competitive
          drive to defeat the enemies of your happiness: your internal demons.



          LESSON 45: MAKE THE MOST OUT OF
          YOUR COACHING RELATIONSHIP

          One of the cardinal principles of psychodynamic work is that change of-
          ten occurs in the context of relationships. When you are your own trading
          coach, one of your challenges is to surround yourself with the right kind
          of relationships: ones that support your goals and mirror to you the person
          and trader you’re capable of being.
               Consider two coaching scenarios in which I’m working with a trader
          at a trading firm. In both situations, the trader has lost more money than
          planned by exceeding position and loss limits. An entire week’s profit is
          wiped out by the single day’s loss. In the first scenario, I chide the trader:

              “How could you be so careless? You just ruined your week. Do you
              realize what will happen if you continue to do this? This is not a
              good time to be on the street looking for a firm hiring new traders.”

              In the second scenario, I adopt a different tone:

              “C’mon, you’re a better trader than that! Remember last month when
              you put together a string of winning days? You never needed to
              put on big size to do that. Let’s see if we can get back to that great
              trading.”

               The first interaction mirrors a sense of failure; “I’m so disappointed in
          you!” is the tone of the message. The approach also focuses on the negative,
          emphasizing the worst-case scenario.
               The second scenario doesn’t avoid the problem, but starts from the
          premise of good trading. It mirrors encouragement and a reminder of the
          trader’s strengths.
               Imagine that these interactions occur day after day, week after week.
          It’s not difficult to see how the first approach would undercut a trader’s
          security and confidence, leading to further bad trading. The second inter-
          action would likely help a trader get back to trading well. It would coach
          success, not just the avoidance of failure.
               All traders inevitably coach themselves: they always talk to them-
          selves about performance, take action to improve performance, and keep
