P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          292                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Among the routines that Ray finds essential to his lifestyle as a
          trader are:

            r Updating data and journals.
            r Reviewing trades.
            r Preparing for the coming day, “including visualization of entries and
              exits.”
            r Balancing other duties and responsibilities with trading regimes.
            r Staying on top of personal and business finances.
            r Completing commitments, including writing articles, preparing for
              talks, and so on.

               He notes that his self-mentoring blends review and research. “I may
          notice a pattern in my journals that needs attention,” he explains. “It may
          be that I am suffering losses or experiencing profits beyond the norm. In
          the former case, I would need to research the context that is leading to the
          loss. I’d need to determine whether it is incompatibility between my plan
          and current market conditions, or whether I am breaching discipline. In
          either case, I have to decide what to do. If current market conditions do not
          suit my plan, I’ll cut down size or take a break. If I am breaching discipline,
          I identify the context/contexts within which the breach/breaches occur and
          take remedial actions. I then review the actions to see if they have had the
          desired results. If not, I change the actions.”
               Ray also carefully reviews and researches periods of unusually positive
          trading performance. “If I am making above normal profits, I determine if
          current market conditions happen to suit my plan or if there has been a
          fundamental shift that is leading to greater profitability. In the former case,
          I increase my size and ensure that I maintain my discipline before I take a
          trade. I have learned that, in my case, I need to be more vigilant when I am
          having a great run than when I am suffering a drawdown. If there has been
          a fundamental shift, I seek to identify what I have done to cause the shift,
          and I seek consciously to continue the new behavior.”

              Vigilance during a run of profitability is an effective way to prevent
              overconfidence and lapses of discipline.

              “I also constantly research new ideas,” Ray Barros notes. He is an avid
          reader and seeks insights that will impact his life and trading. When he
          encounters a new trading idea, he outsources the testing of the idea to
          determine whether or not it truly possesses an edge. “My review provides a
          solid foundation for my activities,” he explains. “I set goals, take action, and
          then see if the action is leading toward or away from the desired outcome.”
