P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                   89


          LESSON 28: INTEGRITY AND DOING
          THE RIGHT THING

          Many of the lessons in this book begin with a discussion of a trading issue
          and then proceed to suggestions about what you can do about the issue.
          This lesson will actually start with the recommendation and then work
          backward from there. Your assignment is to read Ayn Rand’s novel The
          Fountainhead. If you’ve read it previously, the assignment is to reread and
          review it.
               For those not familiar with the book, The Fountainhead is the story of
          architect Howard Roark, who is an unorthodox creative genius. He faces
          stiff opposition to his ideas, including the ambivalence of the woman he
          loves. Throughout, he must decide whether to abandon or compromise his
          ideals, especially as he sees lesser talents succeed commercially by pan-
          dering to public fashion. In many ways, The Fountainhead is a study in
          integrity and the difficulty and importance of doing the right thing.
               There can be no self-esteem without a self: a well-defined sense of
          who one is and what one stands for. There are many false substitutes for
          self-esteem, including the approval of others and the size of one’s trading
          account. Ultimately, however, self-esteem is a function of knowing yourself
          and remaining true to your values: possessing a vision of what can be and
          remaining faithful to that vision.
               Many traders have no more vision than a desire to make money.
          There’s nothing wrong with making money, of course, and for those
          who do so through the independent efforts of mind, such earnings are
          a rightful source of pride. Traders who attempt to latch onto holy grails
          instead of independently relying on their planning and judgment, however,
          substitute the desire for a quick, easy score for the more difficult challenge
          of developing competency in reading and acting on market patterns.
          Someone who consummates a long-term courtship and someone who
          hooks up for a one-night stand engage in the same physical act, but the
          meaning is completely different. One is an expression of esteem; the other
          is often a flight from self.


              In so many fields, we never see the fruits of our labors; we’re part
              of a larger team and process. Trading is unique in that we alone are
              responsible for what we earn, and we see each day the outcomes
              of our efforts.


             When you read The Fountainhead, it’s instructive to reflect on how
          Howard Roark would approach the field of trading. Would he join a
