P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          323

          when calculating statistical significance. For my purpose of hypothesis
          generation, I am willing to tolerate a degree of overlap, and so will use daily
          data to investigate relationships of up to 20 days in duration—particularly
          if the amount of overlap relative to the size of the entire data set is small.
          I would not, say, investigate the next 200 days’ return using daily data for
          a sample of 1,000 trading days. I wouldn’t have a particular problem using
          the daily data to investigate, for instance, the prior five-day price change
          on the next five-day return with a four-year look-back period.

              Your findings will be most robust if your look-back period (the
              period that you are drawing data from) includes a variety of
              market conditions: rising, falling, range bound, high volatility, low
              volatility, and so on.

              In general, my dependent variable will consist of prospective price
          change, because that is what I’m interested in as a trader. The indepen-
          dent variable(s) will consist of whatever my observations tell me might be
          meaningfully related to prospective price change. Normally, I look at de-
          pendent variables with respect to the next day’s return (to help with day
          trading ideas) and the next week’s return (to help with formulating swing
          hypotheses). If I want a sense of the market’s possible bigger picture, I’ll in-
          vestigate returns over the next 20 trading days. Traders with different time
          frames may use different periods, including intraday. Overall, I’ve found
          the 1 to 20 day framework to be most useful in my investigations.
              Once again, practice makes perfect. I would encourage you to become
          proficient at downloading your data and assembling your spreadsheets into
          variables before you try your hand at the actual historical investigations.
          Your results, after all, will only be as valid as the data you enter and the
          transformations you impose upon the data.


                     COACHING CUE

          Note how, with the Practice Sheet assembled as in the above example, you can
          easily look at the next day’s average returns following opening gaps. Your inde-
          pendent variable would be the opening gap, which would be written as =((b3-
          e2)/e2)* 100 (the diﬀerence between today’s open and yesterday’s close as a
          percentage). The day’s price change would be =((e3-b3)/b3)* 100 (the diﬀer-
          ence between today’s close and today’s open as a percentage). You would need
          to use stock index futures data or ETF data to get an accurate reﬂection of the
          market open; the cash index does not reﬂect accurate opening values, as not
          all stocks open for trading in the ﬁrst minute of the session.
