P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          236                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              The successful trading business, like elite technology, pharma-
              ceutical, consumer, and manufacturing firms, devote significant
              resources to research and development: staying ahead of their
              markets.

               When you are your own trading coach, it’s not enough to learn mar-
          kets. You’re an entrepreneur; you’re always developing new strategies, new
          ways of building upon your strengths. What products do you have in your
          pipeline? What markets, strategies, or time frames are you looking to ex-
          pand to? You can adapt your current trading approaches to new markets or
          cultivate new strategies for familiar markets. Your challenge is to develop
          a pipeline: to always be innovating, always searching for new sources of
          profit that capitalize on what you do best.
               Many traders sit down at their stations a little before markets open,
          trade through the day, and then go home, repeating the process day after
          day. That schedule is like coming to work at your café, putting in your
          hours, and then going home until the next workday. That is what you do if
          you’re the employee of the business, not the owner. Your challenge, as your
          own coach, is to actively own and manage your trading business, not just
          put in hours in front of a screen. You need an edge to succeed at trading, but
          you need to develop fresh sources of edge to sustain your trading business.

                     COACHING CUE

          I ﬁnd there is value in learning trading skills at time frames diﬀerent from your
          own. Short-term, intraday traders can beneﬁt from looking at larger market
          themes that move the markets day to day, including intermarket relationships
          and correlations among stock sectors. If you identify those themes and relation-
          ships you can catch market trends as they emerge. Conversely, I ﬁnd it helpful
          for longer-term traders, portfolio managers, and investors to learn the mar-
          ket timing perspectives of the short-term trader. This process aids execution,
          helping traders enter—and add to positions—at good prices. The views from
          diﬀerent time frames can fertilize the search for new sources of edge: the per-
          spectives of big-picture macro investors and laser-focused market makers can
          add value to one another.



          LESSON 74: TRACK YOUR
          TRADING RESULTS

          You cannot coach your trading to success if you do not keep score. Keeping
          score is more than tracking your profits and losses for the day, week, or
