P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                197


          reinforced. This distinction is important and not well appreciated. Posi-
          tive reinforcement is like the feeding of the cats: people come to associate
          something favorable with a particular stimulus situation. Thus, for exam-
          ple, I may associate my early-morning market preparation with a particu-
          lar emotional state of readiness and mastery. That linkage has me looking
          forward to the preparation time and sticking with my routines. The contin-
          gencies between being prepared and feeling good (or being prepared and
          making good trades) are reinforced over time until they become ingrained
          habits.
               Negative reinforcement is a bit subtler, and it lies at the heart of why
          traders seem to cling to patterns that bring them losses. In negative re-
          inforcement, it is the removal of a negative set of consequences, not the
          appearance of something positive, that strengthens the bond between stim-
          ulus situation and response. Let’s say I am in a trade that is going against
          me and I bail out of the trade at the worst possible time, when everyone
          else is selling. Intellectually I may know that, on average, this is an inop-
          portune time to join the crowd, but the trade is so painful at that point that
          the exit feels, for the moment, like a relief. Drug addicts commonly begin
          their habits first by seeking a high (positive reinforcement), then by seek-
          ing to avoid withdrawal (negative reinforcement). The avoidance of pain
          is a powerful human reinforcement, and it shapes learned action patterns
          just as effectively as the introduction of pleasure.


              Many destructive trading behaviors are the result of pain-
              avoidance.


               One of the most devastating examples of learned behavior patterns in
          trading is the association of thrills and excitement with the assumption of
          risk. When traders take too much risk, they experience profits and losses
          that are very large relative to their portfolio size. Some traders may find
          these swings stimulating, to the point where they become their own re-
          inforcements. These traders find themselves trading, not for profits, but
          for thrills. Inevitably, the law of averages catches up to such traders. When
          these traders go through a series of losing trades, days, or weeks, their high
          leverage works against them and they blow up. This is not because thrill-
          seeking traders are inherently self-destructive. Rather, it is because they
          have learned, through repeated emotional experience, the linkage between
          risk-taking and excitement.
               Research suggests that contingencies between situations and re-
          sponses are more quickly and deeply learned if they are accompanied by
          strong emotion. This process is how people can become addicted to pow-
          erful drugs after only a few uses. It is also how we can become fearful and
          paralyzed by a single traumatic incident. An animal that would take weeks
