P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      13

              materials from fresh perspectives puts your ideas in a different light
              and pushes you to question your assumptions. I remained relatively
              bullish on the stock market’s longer-term picture into the final quar-
              ter of 2007. Only when I pushed myself to read informed views
              that clashed with my own—and consulting data that did not fit my
              framework—did I modify my perspectives and avoid significant losses.
           2. Examine the Big Picture. It’s easy to get lost in the market’s
              short-term picture; how it is trading that minute, that day. I find it
              important to periodically zoom out to longer-term charts and place
              the current action into context. Indeed, some of the best trading ideas
              start with a big picture view and then proceed to shorter-term execu-
              tion. I especially find this to be the case when looking at longer-term
              support/resistance, trading ranges, and Market Profile value areas.
              Often, shifting my field of vision will help me avoid an ill-informed,
              reactive trade based on the market’s last few ticks. If something seems
              obvious in the market, switch time frames and generate an entirely
              new perspective. What looks obvious from one view may well be
              obviously wrong from another.
           3. Examine Related Views. Sometimes the action of a single stock or
              sector will illuminate what’s happening in the broader market; one cur-
              rency cross will break out ahead of others. Are we seeing a broad fixed
              income rally, or is the yield curve steepening or flattening? Looking
              across instruments and asset classes keeps us from getting locked into
              ways of thinking. I find myself tracking sector ETFs during the trad-
              ing day to see if stocks are moving in a single direction (trending) or
              are taking different paths within a range. If I see bond traders fleeing
              to safety or assuming risk, I can anticipate selling or buying stocks.
              Seeing the entire financial playing field helps keep us from becoming
              wedded to preconceived ideas.
           4. Take the Break. Just as we take vacations to return to work re-
              freshed, a break from the screen can help us generate fresh market
              views. It is easy to become focused on what is most dramatic and
              salient in markets. Pull back and clear out the head to help you see
              what’s not obvious and then profit by the time it’s recognized by oth-
              ers. I find breaks especially helpful following losing trades, enabling us
              to reflect on the losses and what can be learned from them.

              If your environment is comfortable, it probably isn’t conducive to
              change.

              In short, it’s the mental routines—the mental environment—that we
          most need to change to break unwanted and unprofitable patterns of
          thought and behavior. When you’re your own trading coach, you learn to
