P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    15:45    Printer: Yet to come




                     Acknowledgments


             f, as the saying goes, it takes a village to raise a child, it takes a small

         I   army to write a book. The last lesson of the book is dedicated to my
             mother, Constance Steenbarger, who passed away last year. My deepest
         hope is that this book carries forward the nurturing spirit that she brought
         to her family and students.
              If my mother represented nurturance in my life, my father, Jack Steen-
         barger, has embodied the virtues of hard work, achievement, and love
         of family. From the earliest days of my training as a psychologist, I have
         been fascinated by the psychology of exemplary achievement: what makes
         highly successful people tick. There’s no question where that passionate
         interest originated, and it gives me the greatest of pleasure to acknowledge
         my father for that inspiration.
              None of this would be possible, however, without the understanding,
         love, and support of my wife Margie. In 1984, I traded bachelorhood for a
         life with Margie and her family; to this day, it remains my one superlative
         trade. Twenty-five years later, I’m pleased to report we’re still riding that
         trend, having taken no heat whatsoever!
              I’m saddened, but happy at the same time, to be able to dedicate this
         book to the memory of my uncle, Arnold Rustin, MD, who also passed away
         during the year. A consummate teacher, Arnold represented everything I’ve
         admired and enjoyed in the world of academic medicine. It’s the support
         of Arnold and his wife Rose, even amid their own challenges, which made
         the greatest impression on me, however. I hope their inspiration finds ex-
         pression in this book.
              Thanks, too, to Debi, Steve, Lea, Laura, Ed, Devon, and Macrae, the
         kids who aren’t kids any more, but who have been remarkably understand-
         ing of my hours on the road meeting with traders and my even greater hours
         online, keeping up with a blog and dozens of e-mail and phone calls daily. I
         would not be so grounded without family, including my brother Marc and
         sister-in-law Lisa and our three feline friends: Gina, Ginger, and Mali.
              To the traders and authors who contributed to Chapter 9, my deep-
         est thanks and appreciation for your great work. You provide unparalleled


                                                                                    xvii
