P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         63

          stopped out too quickly, fail to hit targets, or produce outsized gains or
          losses.
               Many traders crow about taking a huge profit on a particular trade. All
          too often, that profit is the result of sizing a volatile position too aggres-
          sively. While it’s nice that the trade resulted in a profit, the reality is that
          the trade probably represents poorly managed risk. Trading 1,000 shares
          of a small cap tech firm can be quite different from trading 1,000 shares of
          a Dow stock, even though their prices might be identical. The higher beta
          associated with the tech trade will ensure that its profits and losses dwarf
          those of the large cap trade. That makes for volatile trading results and
          potential emotional volatility.


              Risk and reward are proportional: pursuing large gains inevitably
              brings large drawdowns. The key to success is trading within your
              risk tolerance so that swings don’t change how you view markets
              and make decisions.

               Do you know the volatility of the market you’re trading right now?
          Have you adjusted your trading to take smaller profits and losses in low
          volatility ones and larger profits and losses when volatility expands? If
          you’re trading different markets or instruments, do you adjust your expec-
          tations for the volatility of these? You wouldn’t drive the same on a busy
          freeway as on one that is wide open; similarly, you don’t want to be
          trading fast markets identically to slow ones.
               One strategy that has worked well for me in this regard is to examine
          the past 20 days of trading and calculate the median high-low price range
          over different holding periods: 30 minutes, 60 minutes, etc. I also take note
          of the variability around that median: the range of slowest and busiest mar-
          kets. With this information, I can accomplish several things:
            r As the day unfolds, I can gauge whether today’s ranges are varying
              from the 20-day average. That gives me a sense for the emerging volatil-
              ity of the day that I’m trading. This helps me adjust expectations as I’m
              trading. For instance, the S&P e-mini market recently made a 12-point
              move during the morning. My research told me that this was at the
              very upper end of recent expectations, a conclusion that kept me from
              chasing the move and helped me take profits on a short position.
            r When I see that volatility over the past 20 days has been quite modest,
              I can focus on good execution, place stops closer to entry points, and
              keep profit targets tight. That has me taking profits more aggressively
              and opportunistically in low volatility environments, reducing my frus-
              tration when moves reverse.
