P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                       27

          a form of experience. As a psychologist, I am impressed by the degree to
          which traders who prepare rigorously feel as though they deserve to win.
          That same sense is missing among those who casually scan newspapers,
          charts, or web sites and then plunk themselves down at the trade station
          to place their orders.
               Many traders confuse self-confidence and positive thinking. Self-
          confidence is not expecting the best; it’s knowing, deep inside, that you
          can handle the worst. The self-confident trader can look a stop-loss level
          in the eye and know that he will be okay if it is triggered. The self-confident
          trader knows that loss is part of the game—and that some of our best
          market information comes from good trade ideas that don’t work out.
          Self-confidence is not cockiness, nor is it viewing the world through rose-
          colored glasses. It’s the quiet sense of, “I’ve been here; I can handle this.”


              Confidence doesn’t come from being right all the time; it comes
              from surviving the many occasions of being wrong.


               Nothing is so important in building self-confidence as successful
          experience in the face of adversity. When you serve as your own trading
          coach, a major task you face is generating your own positive trading ex-
          perience. Just this morning I read an e-mail from a trader who had experi-
          enced harrowing losses in the markets over the past two years. Now he was
          having difficulty sustaining the optimism needed to weather normal losses.
          His failure was not as a trader, but as his own trading coach. When we trau-
          matize ourselves, we generate negative experience. We create a sense of
          helplessness, rather than mastery. We create deep emotional connections
          between trading and loss, rather than between trading and self-efficacy. We
          undercut self-confidence.
               A great way to build self-confidence is to focus on how you trade when
          you’re in the hole. If confidence comes from successfully navigating ad-
          versity, you can build your confidence by working on how you trade when
          trades go against you. The idea is to focus on trading well by giving yourself
          a chance to dig out of the hole by not exiting a losing trade prematurely, but
          also to not allow the losing trade to move so far against you that it creates
          trauma. Every planned loss that you take provides you with an experience
          of control; every drawdown that you battle back from is an experience of
          mastery. When you come back from losses, you reinforce your emotional
          resilience. You can’t control whether you win or lose on a particular trade,
          but you can control how much you lose and how you lose it.
               Every trader needs a plan for losing. Your stop-loss is your plan for
          a losing trade. Cut your size after a series of losing days and focus your
