P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          86                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                     COACHING CUE

          If placing trades is your major source of stimulation in ﬁnancial markets, you’re
          bound to overtrade. By cultivating collaborative relationships with peer traders
          and developing routines for generating trade ideas and themes, you need not
          face boredom during slow markets. Other markets, other time frames: for the
          dedicated trader, there is always something of interest.




          LESSON 27: BUILD
          EMOTIONAL RESILIENCE

          Three traders place the exact same trades; all of them lose money. The
          first trader becomes discouraged, curses the market, and gives up for the
          day. The second trader reacts with frustration, vows to get his money back,
          trades more aggressively, and loses a bundle on the day. The third trader
          pulls back, reassesses her strategy, waits for a clear area of opportunity,
          and places a good trade that brings her even on the day.
               What is the difference among these traders? The research literature in
          psychology refers to it as resilience: the ability to maintain high levels of
          functioning even in the face of significant stresses. A resilient person, for
          example, can lose his job, but still function well at home and implement an
          effective strategy for finding new work. The individual who lacks resilience
          is thrown for a loop by the lost job. This interferes with other areas of life
          and makes it difficult to find new opportunity.
               A key reason why many people lack resilience is that they take neg-
          ative events personally. Some portion of their self-worth is connected to
          their individual life outcomes. When events go well, they feel good. When
          they encounter roadblocks, they become discouraged, doubtful, and frus-
          trated. Instead of dealing directly and constructively with the blocks, they
          react to the emotions triggered by their personalizing of events. An inspir-
          ing example of resilience is author Viktor Frankl’s survival in a Nazi con-
          centration camp. He set about writing a book (first on scraps of paper,
          then in his mind) during his internment, giving him a purpose: a reason to
          keep going. Others who experienced the same horrific conditions lacked
          such purpose and ultimately perished. The larger part of persistence is
          nurturing a reason to persist, a greater purpose and vision.


               The survivors are those who have a vision and purpose greater
               than themselves.
