P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          118                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 37: BUILD YOUR CONSISTENCY
          BY BECOMING RULE-GOVERNED

          One of the major goals of coaching yourself is to turn positive trading be-
          haviors into habit patterns. This is crucially important. You don’t want to
          have to think and make yourself do the right things each time opportunity
          occurs. Rather, you want to do the right things automatically. Effort and
          energy you spend thinking about what to do—and trying to make yourself
          do it—is taken away from markets themselves. When you can do the right
          things automatically, your concentration can be wholly focused on what
          you are doing. That is essential if you’re going to be sensitive to subtle
          market shifts in supply and demand.
               Rules are the bridge between new behavior patterns and acquired
          habits. Children are not born with a developed sense of ethics and respon-
          sibility. They are taught rules by parents and teachers that are eventually
          internalized. Some of that internalization occurs by observing role mod-
          els over time; much of it results from turning the desired behaviors into
          explicit rules that can be rehearsed. Such mental rehearsal allows peo-
          ple to keep old behavior patterns in check and make conscious efforts to
          engage in new ones.
               We see such dynamics at work when traders are learning to control
          losses. Instead of exiting trades when the pain of loss is too great—a
          pattern that comes all too naturally—a trader will create a rule-based stop-
          loss level. The rule may be accompanied by other thoughts that emphasize
          the importance of the rule, the losses that will follow from not following
          the rule, and the benefits of adhering to the rule. In such an instance,
          traders choose to refuse to do what they feel like doing at the moment.
          Rather, they seek to be rule-governed. That is what keeps us driving on the
          proper side of the road, even when we’re in a rush. Rules are checks on our
          impulses; they keep us doing the right things even when we’re not inclined
          to act in our own best interests or the interests of others.

              We follow social rules without even thinking about the rules of
              proper social behavior because we’ve repeated the right behaviors
              so often and have internalized the rules so thoroughly over time.
              That’s the goal with trading rules.

               Trading is especially challenging, because the normal human response
          is rarely the one that makes money. One exercise from the TraderFeed
          blog examined periods of time that were up on a one-month, one-week,
          and one-day basis and compared those with periods that were down over
          those three time frames. In the first situation, almost anyone would identify
