P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                                 253


          to make one. If, however, you’re risking a dollar to make two or more, you
          can be right less than half the time and still wind up in the plus column.


              Good execution means that you calibrate risk as a function of an-
              ticipated reward.


               Execution provides proactive risk management. If you control how
          much you can win and lose based on your price of entry, you keep your
          risk known and lower than your potential reward. You can track the qual-
          ity of your execution if you calculate the amount of heat you take on your
          average trades. Heat is the amount of adverse price movement that occurs
          while you’re in the trade. If you’re taking a great deal of heat to make a
          small amount of money, you’re obviously courting disaster. When your ex-
          ecution is good, you should take relatively little heat compared to the size
          of your gains. Your assignment for this lesson is to calculate heat for each
          of your recent trades and track that over time. This assignment will tell
          you how successful you are at executing your ideas, and it will provide a
          sensitive measure of changing risk/reward in your trading.
               Good execution, psychologically, is all about patience. To get a good
          price, you will have to lay off some trade ideas that end up being profitable.
          Like the poker player, you want to bet when the odds are clearly in your
          favor. That means mucking a lot of hands. Similarly, a business doesn’t try
          to be all things to all people. A business owner passes up certain opportu-
          nities to sell products in order to focus on what she does best. When you’re
          running your trading business well, you don’t take every conceivable op-
          portunity to make money; you wait for your highest probability opportuni-
          ties. The clearer you are about risk and reward, the easier it will be to stick
          to trades that offer favorable expected returns.


                      COACHING CUE

          A simple rule that has greatly aided my executions has been to wait for buyers
          to take their turn if I’m selling the market and wait for sellers to take their turn
          before I’m buying the market. Thus, I can only buy if the NYSE TICK has gone
          negative and if the last X price bars are down. Similarly, I can only sell if the
          NYSE TICK has gone positive and the most recent X price bars have been up.
          This reduces the heat I take on trades by entering after short squeezes and
          program trades juke the market up or down. Once in a while you’ll miss a trade
          if you wait patiently for the other side to take their turn, but the extra ticks you
          make on the trades you do get into more than make up for that.
