P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               231


          LESSON 72: PLAN YOUR
          TRADING BUSINESS

          When you’re your own trading coach, you are also the manager of your
          trading business. What is your business plan for success? How are you go-
          ing to achieve your goals as a trader?
               The first step toward good planning is to know why you are trading.
          That sounds silly: doesn’t everyone trade to make money? Yes and no; I’m
          continually surprised at traders’ fuzziness about their goals. If you’re a be-
          ginner, your goal is simply to learn the ropes, internalize market patterns,
          and practice skills related to good execution and risk management. If so, as
          the previous lesson emphasized, you can accomplish those ends with little
          or no capital at risk. What you need is a learning plan and a platform from
          which you can observe markets and trade them in simulation mode. (The
          elements of learning plans are covered in Enhancing Trader Performance
          and will be addressed in later lessons in this chapter).
               If you are like me and don’t trade full time for a living, your goal is dif-
          ferent. Your objective is to make more than the riskless rate of return (i.e.,
          the amount you could earn, say, from a savings bond or bank certificate of
          deposit) after expenses. In that case, you allocate a portion of your savings
          to your trading account and use that portion of your money to improve
          returns from other investments and savings vehicles. This process means
          that you will be particularly sensitive to risk-adjusted returns, as you won’t
          want to place your savings at undue risk. Trading, in that context, is part
          of diversification of your capital and is part of a larger financial plan.


              Your business plan will look different if you’re trading as an avo-
              cation rather than as your vocation.


              If you’re trading for a living, then you’re truly in the mode in which
          your trading is your business. A retail business needs to know how it will
          make money: what products they will sell, how they will sell them, how
          much it will cost them to sell them, and how much they can charge for
          them in order to make an acceptable return on investment. In your trading
          business, the questions become:

            r What will you trade and how will you trade it? What simulated and live
              trading experience tells you that this will be successful?
            r What will your overhead be? This includes software, hardware, com-
              missions, and other expenses related to full-time trading, from the cost
              of data to your electronic connections and educational materials.
