P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          84                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          makes sense for us to be able to develop a feel for reality, as well as a
          conceptual grasp.


               Access to intuition requires a still mind; highly intuitive people are
               not bored by stillness and, indeed, thrive on it.


               When our attention is divided and we are distracted, we lose our
          feel. This is because the implicit pattern recognition manifests itself as a
          felt sense, a subtle kind of awareness. If I am not attending to those subtle
          cues of mind and body, I will miss signals altogether. In such a state, we
          cannot pick up on nuances of conversations or small, but significant shifts
          in traffic patterns. We lose valuable information, and we lose much of our
          ability to react quickly based upon internalized patterns.
               Worse still, in a chronically distracted state, we never sustain the at-
          tention in the first place to internalize complex market patterns.
               This is why serenity—the quiet mind—is so important. With a quiet
          mind, we can attend to the subtle cues of pattern recognition. Undistracted,
          our antennae are extended, able to pick up signals of situations that feel
          right and those that don’t. The experienced trader has seen so many mar-
          kets and perceived so many relationships among market variables that she
          learns to trust these gut signals. It is neither mystical nor irrational. Just
          as a horse whisperer can become one with the horse, understanding the
          most subtle communications, an experienced trader can hear the whispers
          of markets.
               But if the mind is noisy, the whispers are drowned out.


               Those who fear boredom never achieve the still mind.

               The two essential steps in achieving a quiet mind are a still body and
          focused thought. This is where biofeedback can be extremely helpful for
          the trader: it provides a structured method for learning to quiet the mind.
          The biofeedback that I use currently is the emWave unit from Heart Math
          (www.heartmath.com). It provides measures of both heart rate and heart
          rate variability (HRV). The user’s finger goes into a small sensor, which is
          connected to a computer with the biofeedback software. The HRV read-
          ings are displayed in a chart; as readings rise, the chart readings become
          like sine waves. Lower readings create jagged, nonrhythmical patterns. The
          goal is to keep the patterns as sine wave-like as possible. There is also a fea-
          ture that displays the proportion of high, medium, and low HRV readings
          over time, accompanied by audio beeps. You can thus close your eyes (for
          instance, while engaging in guided imagery) and still track your HRV. Even
