P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                     71


                      COACHING CUE

          Be particularly careful to track your well-being around times of great life tran-
          sition: giving birth to a child, buying a new home, moving, undergoing a sep-
          aration in a relationship, experiencing a death in the family, going through a
          major illness, etc. Many, many times these times of transition are also times
          of stress and diminished well-being. Even seemingly happy events, such as giv-
          ing birth, can lead to enhanced performance pressures and diminished sleep!
          Adverse changes in ﬁnancial status are particularly challenging in this regard.
          Consider reducing trading risk until these situations are placed into perspective
          and adequately addressed.




          LESSON 22: BUILD YOUR HAPPINESS

          Two of the essential components of psychological well-being are joy and
          contentment. It is important to have positive feelings about what we’re do-
          ing, but it’s also important to enjoy a degree of contentment with our lives.
          Together, joy and contentment yield an ongoing sense of happiness.
               As the Aristotle quote at the beginning of this chapter indicates, hap-
          piness lies at the center of life. When the Greek philosophers referred to
          happiness, they did not simply mean a positive, sunny mood. Instead, hap-
          piness was intimately tied to fulfillment: the sense of actualizing one’s po-
          tentials and being the person you are capable of becoming. A happy person
          in this sense can go through periods of sadness and loss, anxiety and frus-
          tration. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine a goal-directed life that does not
          encounter such obstacles. What contributes to the happiness, however, is
          the deep sense of being on the right path in life: the sense that you are doing
          what you’re meant to be doing.
               In that context, the opposite of Aristotle’s happiness is not sadness,
          but rather a certain kind of emotional dis-ease: a vague but pervasive ex-
          istential guilt that you’re letting life’s opportunities slip by; that you’re
          settling for less than you rightfully should. Much is written about the neg-
          ative emotional experiences of anger, anxiety, and depression, but little
          about this kind of gnawing guilt. It is not so dramatic as a panic reaction or
          an anger outburst, but it can be equally damaging in its haunting corrosive-
          ness. Day after day, week after week, month after month, to feel like you’re
          selling yourself short in your career, your romantic relationships, and your
          personal development: it’s difficult to imagine a durable confidence and
          self-esteem built on such a foundation.
               Conversely, there is a special glow of satisfaction when you’re im-
          mersed in a truly fulfilling activity. As a psychologist, those moments when
