P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                    83


          LESSON 26: CULTIVATE THE
          QUIET MIND

          When we think of psychological well-being, we naturally think of joy, plea-
          sure, and vigor. A different facet of well-being is serenity: a mind free of
          distracting thoughts and feelings. In many ways, serenity is vital to elite
          performance: a mind at peace is one that can be fully focused on market
          patterns.
               Most of us spend too much of our time assaulted by stimuli to achieve
          a high degree of serenity. Social interaction, television, radio, music play-
          ers, cell phones, billboards, and computers: much of our day is spent in a
          mélange of sights and sounds. Each calls to our attention, entertaining us
          from without, but leaving us ever more challenged to stimulate ourselves
          from within.
               In the absence of the ability to generate our own stimulation, many of
          us equate the absence of stimulation with boredom. Boredom is an empty
          state, a frustrated state in which there is no-thing of interest. Upon reflec-
          tion, however, we can see that boredom betrays a kind of inner emptiness,
          an inability to find objects of interest in our inner and outer worlds.
               The aversion to boredom is the source of many trading problems. To
          erase boredom, traders will manufacture trades, overtrading—and sustain-
          ing losses—in the process. Traders will take unusual risks and size posi-
          tions too daringly to sustain their excitement and interest. It is ironic that
          many traders consider emotion to be their enemy, when in fact it is the
          boredom of quiet markets that they particularly dread.
               But the aversion to boredom damages trading in a much more subtle
          way. As I stressed in the Enhancing Trader Performance book, trading ex-
          pertise hinges on the ability to detect and act on patterns that occur within
          noisy data. Experiments with implicit learning suggest that we can detect
          complex patterns in situations without being able to verbalize the specific
          nature of those patterns. This occurs routinely when we sense a market
          behaving differently from usual, or when we get an uneasy feeling about a
          conversation. Little children assemble grammatical phrases without know-
          ing the rules of grammar: they’ve encountered so many examples of proper
          speech that they know what sounds right—and what sounds wrong. They,
          like traders and conversationalists, develop a feel for patterns and devia-
          tions from those.
               This gut feeling, the basis of all valid intuition, is not mere hunch.
          It’s the result of countless repetitions of complex patterns. When I first
          drove a car, I could barely stay in my lane. With experience, I now antic-
          ipate potential accidents several cars ahead of me. Many times I tap my
          brake or raise my alertness before I’m consciously aware of the troubling
          situation. If we needed to rely on explicit reasoning for all life’s activities,
          we would never be able to respond quickly to danger. Evolutionarily, it
