P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                            185

          you have been saying to yourself in your worst self-talk, it will become
          much easier to push back. If that hated person were actually standing in
          front of you while you were trading, voicing negativity, you’d have no trou-
          ble telling him to shut up. When you use imagery to associate your worst
          thinking with the worst people from your past, you learn to shut yourself
          up. And that is a major triumph of self-coaching!


                      COACHING CUE

          There are many other powerful applications of imagery in combating negative,
          automatic thought patterns. One trader I worked with took up martial arts and
          used the workouts to imagine striking out against the patterns that had held
          him back. After he rehearsed that mind frame in practice after practice, he only
          needed to adopt certain postures during the trading day to regain his ﬁghting
          form. Another trader found that he was sharpest in his trading when he felt
          physically ﬁt. He used his exercise routines to rehearse ways of thinking about
          himself and trading that reinforced his strengths. During the midday, he took
          a short exercise break, which helped clear his mind, but also placed him in
          greater touch with the mindset that he was cultivating. Not all eﬀective imagery
          is visual; sometimes associating a way of thinking with a physical state can help
          us use body to aﬀect mind.




          LESSON 58: CHALLENGE NEGATIVE
          THOUGHT PATTERNS WITH THE
          COGNITIVE JOURNAL

          One way to use a cognitive journal, we have seen, is to track automatic
          thought patterns, so that you can become highly aware of negative self-talk
          and how it is connected to your emotions and behavior. A simple extension
          of the journal, however, is useful in restructuring our mind maps.
               In the journal described earlier, we divided pages into three columns,
          with the first column representing a description of situations in which
          automatic thoughts occur; the second column captures the self-talk; and
          the third column highlights the consequences (in mood, behavior, trading)
          of that self-talk. The added fourth column represents your systematic ef-
          forts to change the internal dialogue and replace the automatic, negative
          thoughts with more realistic, constructive alternatives.
               Let’s start with an example. Suppose a trader is dealing with a perfec-
          tionist pattern in which she frequently criticizes her performance as not
          good enough. Even when she makes money, she focuses on how much
          she left on the table by not catching highs and lows. The result leaves her
