P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                     5


          money, and build frustration. Like my initial efforts at weight loss, your
          attempts at change fail because they lack emotional force.
               Research into the process of successful versus unsuccessful therapy
          finds that emotional experience—not talk—powers change. No one ever
          felt valuable and lovable by standing in front of a mirror and reciting self-
          enhancing statements. The experience of a meaningful romantic relation-
          ship, however, yields the deepest of affirmations. Yes, you can tell your-
          self you’re competent, but experiencing success in the face of challenge
          provides a lasting sense of efficacy. Pleasure, pain: nature hardwires us
          to internalize emotional experience so that we can pursue what enhances
          life and avoid what harms us. That ability to internalize our most powerful
          emotional experiences helps us to sustain the changes we initiate.


              The enemy of change is relapse: falling back into old, unproduc-
              tive ways of thinking and behaving. Without the momentum of
              emotion, relapse is the norm.


               Are you going to work on yourself as a trader today? Are you go-
          ing to use today as an opportunity to learn and develop yourself, regard-
          less of the day’s profitability? If so, you’ll need a goal for the day. What
          are you going to work on: Building a strength? Correcting a weakness?
          Repeating something you did well yesterday? Avoiding one of yesterday’s
          mistakes?
               An important first step is to set the goal. We cannot succeed as change
          agents if we don’t perceive a clear path from the person we are to the per-
          son we wish to become. A valuable second step is to write down the goal
          or talk out loud into a recorder. This step helps cement desired changes in
          your mind. But will the pursuit of your goal truly possess emotional force?
          Will it transform you from one who thinks about change to one who truly
          becomes a change agent?
               The secret to goal setting is providing your goals with emotional
          force. If your goal is a want, you’ll pursue it until the feeling of desire
          subsides. If your goal is a must-have—a burning need, like my dietary
          change—it becomes an organizing principle, a life focus. You won’t be-
          come a better trader because you want to be. You will only coach yourself
          to success when self-improvement becomes your organizing principle: a
          must-have need.
               Try this exercise. Before you start trading, seat yourself comfortably
          and enter into a nice slow rhythm of deep breathing. Imagine yourself—as
          vividly as you can—starting your trading day. Watch the market move on
