P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          269

              and which was a big failure. The trading journal I use today goes back
              more than four years now, and I made about 5,500 trades in that time.
              It is an invaluable source of information about myself and the ways I
              handle certain types of markets. If I encounter a rough patch in the
              markets I can look back and see if I had a similar experience in the
              past. I can see how I handled the situation then, whether my solution
              was successful, or whether I should better try a different approach to-
              day. Usually before I screw up big time, I have a few days with smaller
              and smaller profits. Looking back I see that I felt insecure in the mar-
              kets: something was changing and I was not changing with the market.
              So I struggled to keep the green until something snapped and suddenly
              I was totally and absolutely wrong. The next day or two, I often make it
              back before I have a second deep red down day. After that I usually get
              back on track with smaller profits. The account starts to consolidate
              before I manage the next trend move.
                   “Writing the Globetrader blog I maintain to this day has made me
              accountable. I started the blog because I hoped that by sharing my ap-
              proach to the markets, older, wiser traders would read it and question
              me or point me in a different direction by commenting on my ideas.
              Fortunately for me some of the comments I received proved invalu-
              able and are now an integral part of my trading system. You don’t need
              to write a public blog, but writing about your thoughts in a trade, how
              you see the markets, or what constitutes a trade setup structures your
              approach to the markets. Right now I’m at a point in my development
              as a trader where I try to dissect that gut feeling I wrote about earlier,
              so I can consciously see why my subconscious mind just gave me a
              clear Go ahead and take that trade signal. Or why it just questioned an
              otherwise wonderful looking signal and is proven right a minute later.
              By writing about these trade setups, I can relive the feelings I had when
              the trade opportunity presented itself in real time. Eventually I can see
              why the trade setup actually was not an opportunity. The blog is also
              the place to deal with all the demons and obstructions you will en-
              counter in your trading. Writing about the problems is the first step to
              solving them. As long as you have no mechanical automated trade sys-
              tem, you have to accept that you are human and will make mistakes.
              You need to deal with them and you will have to find ways to avoid or
              integrate them or you will not make it in trading. But the first step is
              always to bring them in the open, so they can no longer hide.”


              Start a blog as a great way to journal your ideas and interact with
              others about them.
