P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          268                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              of money in funds. I had trusted the fund managers to do a good job;
              instead they did a lousy job and I decided I could do better! It wasn’t
              easy. Somewhere I read that if you can’t trade 1 futures contract suc-
              cessfully, why do you think you can trade 10 contracts successfully?
              That was a statement I could accept and actually still follow to this
              day. So I gave myself a $3,000 account and started trading futures.
              (I never encountered the problems I had in my trading when trading
              in demo mode, so I traded real most of the time). I went bankrupt
              (actually below $2,000, which was the limit I had to maintain to con-
              tinue trading) at least five times. I funded my account with about
              $20,000 over the last seven years and made it all back within three
              months, when I finally got it right. I’m not out of the woods today, but
              I have started taking out money for my living from my account. I still
              have days where I screw up big time and need to build myself up again;
              where I need to question my plan, myself, and my approach to the mar-
              kets. But I know today that I can trade and that I have an edge. I trust
              myself to do what is necessary to do, even when I screw up. I know I
              will stand up again and make it back.”


              Mastering great challenges yields great confidence.


              Luck
              “There is no room for luck in trading? Don’t believe that for one sec-
              ond,” Chris asserts. “How many trades did you do and looking back
              you know you were just lucky to get out breakeven or make a huge
              windfall profit? I always think I’m entitled to two or three lucky trades
              per month. But make sure you know you got away lucky. Don’t bask
              in the glory of that wonderful trade, when all you did was violate your
              rules, add to that lousy entry, and then have the luck to ride a spike
              against the prevailing trend right to the tip.”

              Keep a Detailed Trade Journal and Write a Blog
              “You need to be totally honest with yourself,” Chris advises. “There
              is no rock to hide under if you screw up. It shows in your account and
              you need to document it. Otherwise you will do the same mistakes over
              and over. Believe me, you will still do the same mistakes over and over
              again, even when you write a journal, but at least now you know you
              made the same mistake again. A trading journal can provide you with
              the statistics necessary to develop trust in yourself. It will tell you if
              you have an edge. It can tell you which approach to the markets works
