P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          310                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              When independent patterns point to similar directional edges, we
              have especially promising hypotheses for trading.


               Of course, if we generate enough hypotheses, some are going to look
          promising simply as a matter of chance. We could look at all combina-
          tions of Dow stocks, day of week, and week of year and the odds are
          good that we’d find some pattern for some stock that looks enticing, such
          as (to invent one possibility) IBM tends to rise on the first Wednesday of
          months during the summer season. Good hypotheses need to make sense;
          you should have some idea of why they might be valid. It makes sense, for
          instance, to buy after a period of weakness because you would benefit from
          short covering and an influx of money from the sidelines. It doesn’t make
          sense to buy a stock on alternate Thursdays during months that begin with
          M—no matter what the historical data tell you.
               When you’re first learning to generate good hypotheses, your best bet
          is to keep it simple and get your feel for the kinds of patterns that are
          most promising. Many of your initial candidates will emerge from inves-
          tigations of charts. Perhaps you’ll notice that it has been worth selling a
          stock when it rises on unusually high volume, or that markets have tended
          to bounce following a down open that follows a down day. Such ideas are
          worth checking out historically. What patterns have you noticed in your
          trading and observation? Write down these patterns and keep them simple:
          these patterns will get you started in our qualitative research.


                     COACHING CUE

          Several newsletters do an excellent job of testing historical patterns and can
          provide you with inspiration for ideas of your own. Check out the contributions
          of Jason Goepfert, Rob Hanna, and Rennie Yang in Chapter 9, along with their
          links. All three are experienced traders and investigators of market patterns.




          LESSON 92: FRAME GOOD HYPOTHESES
          WITH THE RIGHT DATA

          In the previous lesson, I encouraged you to keep hypotheses simple. This
          is not just for your learning; in general, we will generate the most robust
          hypotheses if we don’t try to get too fancy and add many conditions to our
          ideas. Ask a question that is simple and straightforward, such as, “What
