P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          132                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          we have relationships with our markets, and those relationships repeat
          patterns that we’ve enacted in other relationships. Let’s take a look at how
          we break free of those patterns . . .


          LESSON 41: PSYCHODYNAMICS: ESCAPE
          THE GRAVITY OF PAST RELATIONSHIPS

          The psychodynamic approaches to change have evolved significantly from
          the psychoanalytic work of Sigmund Freud and the subsequent contri-
          butions of “neo-Freudians.” In the process of this evolution, psychody-
          namic thought has turned away from viewing instincts and sexuality as the
          primary basis for behavior and toward an interpersonal understanding of
          recurring conflicts and patterns. At the same time, psychodynamic psy-
          chology has also departed from the analytic couch and the presumption
          of therapy as a long-term process, emphasizing more active, shorter-term
          methods of change. Surprisingly, this evolution has largely taken place
          outside the public eye, contributing to a perception that analytic methods
          are outmoded and outdated. Nothing could be further from the truth.
               The core perspective of the psychodynamic model is that cur-
          rent problems are reenactments of conflicts and patterns from past
          relationships. The self is viewed as the result of years of internalization
          of relationship experiences. When we enjoy positive, affirming relation-
          ships, we internalize a positive self-image and concept. Negative, conflicted
          relationships are internalized as a negative and conflicted sense of self.
          This perspective touches on one of the themes from earlier in this book:
          relationships serve as mirrors by which we experience ourselves. We are
          the sum of our significant relationship experiences.
               Over the lifespan, we learn coping strategies (defenses) for deal-
          ing with the anxieties brought by relationship conflicts and their conse-
          quences. These defenses may be successful in warding off discomfort, but
          they tend to become outmoded in future relationships and life situations.
          When current situations trigger the feelings evoked by past relationship
          problems, our outmoded defenses lead us to behave in ways that bring un-
          wanted outcomes. These patterns of feelings evoked from the past along
          with the defensive reactions and negative consequences constitute what
          Lester Luborsky calls core conflictual relationship themes. These themes
          repeat themselves in various ways, across various situations, causing us to
          behave in unwanted ways. The purpose of counseling and therapy, from
          this vantage point, is to free us from these cyclical maladaptive patterns.

              When we “overreact” to situations, the odds are good that
              we’re reacting to themes from our past as well as the current
              situations that trigger those themes.
