P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 28, 2008       9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          36                                                        THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your loss levels and review those plans thoroughly, they become familiar
          and you become prepared. (See the brief questionnaire in Figure 2.1 to as-
          sess whether your stress is turning into distress.)


                If you are prepared for adversity, you will respond with normal
                stress, not distress.


              Trading will always be stressful, but self-coaching ensures that it won’t
          be filled with distress. Remember, your job is to maintain a mindset that
          keeps your confidence and motivation high: under those conditions, you’ll



               Please respond to the following questions with the scale below:

                                  1 = rarely or never
                                  2 = occasionally
                                  3 = sometimes
                                  4 = fairly often
                                  5 = most of the time

           How often do the following interfere with your work and/or your relationships?

                  1) Nervousness or anxiety? —
                  2) A downbeat or depressed mood? —
                  3) Frustration or anger? —
                  4) Guilt or self-blame? —
                  5) Alcohol or other substances? —
                  6) Arguments or fights? —
                  7) Fatigue or exhaustion? —
                  8) Sleep problems? —
                  9) Headaches, stomachaches, muscle tension? —
                 10) Worry, negative thinking? —

           Note: Even a single score of 4 or greater merits attention and possible con-
           sultation with a professional (see Resource page at the end of this chapter),
           particularly if the problem is long-standing (greater than one year in duration).
           Several scores of 3 or greater are also worthy of attention. Chapters 4 through
           6 of this book will outline specific brief therapy techniques that can be useful in
           addressing these problems, particularly when these are situational, not chronic.

          FIGURE 2.1 Brief Distress Questionnaire
