P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          204                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                     COACHING CUE

          An increasing number of professional trading ﬁrms—particularly proprietary
          trading shops—are creating online access to their traders, trading, and re-
          sources. Several of these ﬁrms are mentioned in Chapter 9. Read the blogs
          from these ﬁrms and participate in their learning activities as an excellent way
          to connect with other traders and model their best practices.




          LESSON 64: SHAPE YOUR TRADING
          BEHAVIORS

          Two children, two different homes: both improve their test grades in math;
          both fail in English. In the first home, the parents praise the improvement in
          math and encourage similar progress in English. In the second home, the
          parents call attention to the English grade and demand to know why the
          child couldn’t pick up that grade as well. Which child will be most likely to
          show further school progress?
              Behavioral psychologists who utilize behavior modification as a means
          for altering action patterns would support the first set of parents. Positive
          reinforcement, as a whole, works better than punishment. If we reinforce
          the right behaviors, the child will learn to do the right thing. If we punish
          the wrong behaviors, the child will learn to fear us. Nothing positive is
          necessarily learned.


              Punishment fails because it does not model and reinforce the right
              behaviors.


               Many traders seek to motivate themselves more through punishment
          than praise. These traders focus more on their losing trades than on their
          winners. They spend more time on weak areas of trading than building and
          extending their strengths. Such traders learn to associate unpleasant things
          with trading. These traders anticipate criticism and punishment and find it
          difficult to stay wholeheartedly engaged with the learning process.
               We can see such dynamics at work in the journals many traders keep.
          One page after another details what the trader did wrong and what he
          needs to do to improve. Self-evaluations emphasize the bad trading, every-
          thing that could have been better. It’s little wonder that these traders find
          it difficult to sustain the process of maintaining a journal. After all, who
          wants to face negativity and psychological punishment every working day?
