P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                            317


          these skills, you’ll have them for life, and they will greatly aid your ability
          to generate promising trading hypotheses.


                      COACHING CUE

          Trading platforms that support Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) enable you to
          link spreadsheets to the platform’s data servers, so that the spreadsheets will
          populate in real time. This is helpful for tracking indicators as you trade, and it
          can also be a time-eﬃcient way to archive data of interest. See Rennie Yang’s
          segment in Chapter 9 for an illustration of the use of DDE.




          LESSON 94: VISUALIZE YOUR DATA

          One of the best ways to explore data for possible relationships is to actu-
          ally see the data for yourself. You can create simple charts in Excel that
          will enable you to see how two variables are related over time, identify-
          ing possible patterns that you might not have noticed from the spreadsheet
          rows and columns. For instance, when charting an indicator against a mar-
          ket average, you may notice divergence patterns that precede changes in
          market direction. Should you notice such patterns frequently, they might
          form the basis for worthwhile historical explorations.
               Again, a basic introductory text for Excel users will cover the details
          of creating different kinds of charts, from column charts to line graphs to
          pie charts. You’ll also learn about the nuances of changing the colors on a
          chart, altering the graphics, and labeling the various lines and axes. In this
          lesson, I’ll walk you through a few basics that will get you started in your
          data exploration.


              Many times, you can identify potential trading hypotheses by see-
              ing relationships among data elements.


               A simple chart to begin with will have dates in column A, price data in
          column B, and a second set of price data in column C (see Table 10.1). This
          chart is helpful when you want to visualize how movements in the first trad-
          ing instrument are related to movements in the second. For basic practice,
          here are some hypothetical data to type into Excel, with the data labels in
          the first row. Column A has the dates, column B contains closing prices for
          a market index, and column C has the closing prices for a mining stock.
               To create the chart, highlight the data with your mouse, including
          the data labels, and click on the Excel menu item for Insert. You’ll select
