P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          258                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               One way that I see traders utilizing this information is in the way that
          they scale into trades. Their initial position size might be relatively small,
          but traders will add to the position as fresh information validates their idea.
          My trading capital per trade idea is divided into six units. I typically will en-
          ter a position with one or two units. Only if the idea is finding support will
          a third or fourth unit enter the picture. I have found that, if my trades are
          going to be wrong, they’re generally wrong early in their lifespan. By en-
          tering with minimal size, I incur small drawdowns when I’m wrong. If I
          add to a position as it is finding support, I maximize the gains from good
          trades. This trade management, I find, is just as important to many
          traders’ performance as the quality of their initial ideas. Indeed, I’ve seen
          traders throw lots of trade ideas at the wall and only add capital to the ones
          that stick: the management of their trades makes all the difference to their
          returns.
               Such trade management means that you have to be actively engaged
          in processing information while the trade is on, not just passively watch-
          ing your position. Good trade management is quite different from chasing
          markets that happen to be going in your favor. It is a separate execution
          process unto itself, in which you can wait for normal pullbacks against
          your position to add to the position at favorable levels. If you are long, for
          example, and the market is in an uptrend, the retracements should occur
          at successively higher price levels. By adding after the retracement, you
          gain the profit potential when the market returns to its prior peak, but you
          also ensure that risk/reward will be favorable for the piece of the trade that
          you’re adding.


              Each piece added to a trade needs a separate assessment of risk
              and reward to guide its execution.


               While I’m in a short-term trade, I’m closely watching intraday senti-
          ment for clues as to whether buyers or sellers are more aggressive in the
          market. I will watch the NYSE TICK (the number of stocks trading on
          upticks minus those trading on downticks), and I will track the Market
          Delta (www.marketdelta.com; the volume of ES futures transacted at the
          market offer minus the volume transacted at the market bid). These track-
          ings tell me if the balance of sentiment is in my direction. If the sentiment
          turns against me, I may decide to discretionarily exit the position prior to
          hitting my stop-loss level. That, too, is part of trade management. To be
          sure, it is risky to front-run stop-levels: it invites impulsive behavior when-
          ever markets tick against you. I’ve found, however, that if I’m long the ES
          futures and we see a breakdown in the Russell 2000 (ER2) futures or a
          move to new lows in a couple of key market sectors, the odds are good
