P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                129


              yield enduring results. Many traders derive some benefit from initial
              imagery work and then promptly return to business as usual. Consis-
              tency in the use of the exercises ensures that the new patterns you’re
              rehearsing will remain top of the mind over time. Frequent use of im-
              agery work is a great way to sustain mindfulness about change and the
              need for change.

               When you are your own trading coach, you want to see and feel your-
          self to be successful, not just engage in occasional thoughts of success.
          In your internal world, you can practice skills, engage in new thought
          patterns, and achieve goals with consistency long before you actually ac-
          complish all of those in live trading. Your assignment is to generate pow-
          erful, elaborate imagery scenarios of stressful, challenging market situa-
          tions; the thoughts, feelings, and behavior patterns associated with those;
          and the specific steps you want to take to master those situations. When
          you construct your guided imagery, you want to feel the emotions of fear,
          greed, frustration, and boredom and imagine yourself tempted to engage
          in your usual, negative patterns in response to those states. In your imag-
          ined scenario, you will vividly envision yourself keeping those negative
          patterns in check and purposefully enacting your best practices. Thus, for
          instance, you might imagine yourself tempted to add to a position when it
          goes through your stop-loss level, but checking that temptation and instead
          acting on the stop.

              Imagination for the trader is the equivalent of a practice field for an
              athlete: a place to prepare for performance by creating simulated
              performance situations.

               You will be the trader you are capable of being in your imagery work
          and practice long before you consistently enact those ideals in your daily
          trading. There is no reason to take months or years to change behavior pat-
          terns when you can make every day an experience of concentrated learn-
          ing. Much of successful self-coaching is the result of a creative and tena-
          cious use of imagery and practice.


                      COACHING CUE

          Use your imagery to imagine yourself as the kind of trader you aspire to be: the
          risk taker, the disciplined decision maker, the patient executioner of ideas, the
          canny trader who learns from losing trades. If you create a role and an image of
          yourself in that role, you enact scenarios that, over time, become part of you.
