P1: JYS
conc    JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:18     Printer: Yet to come




                                Conclusion
                    Science strives to achieve unity of fact. Art strives to
                    achieve unity of feeling.
                                                        —Stephen Pepper




         This is our final lesson; let’s see if we can achieve a bit of unity of feeling
         as well as fact.



         LESSON 101: FIND YOUR PATH

         My mother, Constance Steenbarger, passed away last year. She was an
         artist and an art teacher. Her greatest work of art, however, was her family.
         She provided her children—and her husband—with the one, irreplaceable
         psychological gift: the knowledge and the feeling that they were special.
         It’s amazing how much you can achieve when you know that you’re not or-
         dinary. Out of that awareness, you’re unwilling to settle for average in your
         work, your relationships, or your returns from markets. When you create a
         work of art out of your family, you empower human beings to want to make
         works of art of their lives. What greater accomplishment could there be?
         If I can achieve, as a psychologist and parent, a bit of what Connie Steen-
         barger accomplished with her family, it will count more than any degree
         after my name, any great trade I might place.
              But isn’t that what becoming your own coach is all about? It doesn’t
         matter if the focus is trading, sales, parenting, or athletics: the goal is
         to make a work of art of your life by becoming the best you can poss-
         ibly be.
              The great disease that afflicts most people is their inability to think
         greatly of themselves. It’s not about narcissism (which reflects an absence
         of self, not authentic greatness), and it’s not about new-age self-esteem
         palliatives. Rather, thinking greatly of oneself is charting a path in life that
         makes a difference. It’s living a goal-oriented life, not a life of drifting from
         day to day. It’s remaining true to values and purposes, so that life has worth

                                                                                     339
