P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          202                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          traders also offers powerful behavioral advantages that can aid your self-
          coaching. Thanks to Web 2.0 and the many online resources available, such
          social networking can occur virtually, not just within a trading firm.
              Psychologist Albert Bandura was one of the first behaviorists to ob-
          serve how reinforcement in a social context can aid the acquisition of new
          behaviors. When we observe others rewarded for positive behaviors, the
          vicarious experience becomes part of our learning. Similarly, when we see
          others making mistakes and paying the price for these, we learn to avoid
          a similar fate. In this way, your learning becomes a model for others and
          theirs provides models for you. Experience is multiplied many times over,
          accelerating the learning process.


              Social learning multiplies experience and shortens learning
              curves.

               Since I first began full-time work as a coach for trading firms in 2004,
          my own trading has changed radically. I have learned to factor intermar-
          ket relationships into my trading, and I have learned to think in terms of
          risk-adjusted returns, with each trade carefully calibrated for both risk and
          reward. I am keenly aware of the effect of position sizing on my returns,
          and I carefully track my trading results to identify periods of shifting per-
          formance that might be attributable to market changes. These changes all
          resulted from observing successful professionals across a variety of trading
          settings, from proprietary trading shops to investment banks. Since insti-
          tuting these changes, I’ve enjoyed greater profitability with smaller draw-
          downs. Seeing how the best traders managed their capital provided me
          with powerful lessons that I could apply to my own trading.
               Perhaps my most effective learning, however, came from observing
          failed traders. I have seen many traders lose their jobs (and careers) as the
          result of faulty risk management and an inability to adapt to market shifts.
          Those failure experiences were painful for the traders, but also for me, as I
          developed close relationships with many of them. Their pain and the crush-
          ing of their dreams was powerful learning for me. I vowed to never make
          those mistakes myself.


              We learn most from emotional experience, including the experi-
              ences of others.

              When you share ideas in a social network, including self-coaching ef-
          forts, you obtain many learning experiences that become your own. Vicari-
          ous learning is still learning, whether it’s learning concrete trading skills or
          learning ways of handling performance pressures. One of the real values of
