P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          39

              in lessons and regional theaters before they see their names under
              the Broadway lights. Before surgeons make a living from their trade,
              they spend four years as a medical student, four more years as a sur-
              gical resident, and even more years in subspecialty training. Expect-
              ing to make a sustainable living from trading within the first years of
              exposure to markets is wholly unrealistic. More realistic expectations
              would be to keep losses to a reasonable level, cover one’s costs with
              regularity, and improve trading processes. There is no path to exper-
              tise that doesn’t first require time to develop mere competence. If you
              expect to make a living from trading much more quickly than people
              in other fields are able to sustain a livelihood, you are setting yourself
              up for frustration and failure.
               An excellent antidote to these toxic assumptions is to write out your
          expectations as part of keeping a trading journal. This includes your expec-
          tations for each day of trading—your goals for trading well—but also your
          expectations for your development over time. My goal for my own trad-
          ing performance is relatively modest: I want to earn more than the riskless
          rate of return after trading costs, and I want to do that by risking less than
          that proportion of my capital. In other words, I’m targeting positive risk-
          adjusted returns; that integrates my performance and process goals. I will
          be very happy if I average one percent returns on my portfolio per month
          by risking significantly less than that.

              By focusing on risk-adjusted returns, not just absolute profitability,
              we blend process and outcome goals.

               This may not be a realistic target for you, depending on your level of
          development and your risk appetite as a trader. What is important is not my
          target numbers, but rather the fact that I have developed realistic, attain-
          able objectives for my trading. If I achieve my expectations, I feel a sense
          of pride and accomplishment. If I fall short, I can quickly identify that fact,
          pull back my risk exposure, and make necessary corrections.
               A formula for positive trading development is: Always expect success,
          and always define success so that it is challenging, but attainable. Writing
          out your expectations for the day, week, month, and year—and ensuring
          that they’re doable—is a powerful lever over your emotional experience as
          a trader.

                     COACHING CUE

          A great entry in a daily trading journal: “What would make my trading day a
          success today, even if I don’t make money?” That simple question leads directly
          to process goals—the things you can best control.
