P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          332                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          sectors, related asset classes—anything can be a context that affects recent
          market behavior. In exploring these patterns, you become more sensitive
          to them in real-time, aiding your selection and execution of trades.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you’re interested in longer-term trading or investing, you can create spread-
          sheets with weekly or monthly data and investigate independent variables such
          as monthly returns on the next month’s returns; VIX levels on the next month’s
          volatility; sentiment data on the next month’s returns; price changes in oil on
          the next month’s returns, etc. You can also code data for months of the year
          (or beginning/end of the month) to investigate calendar eﬀects on returns.




          LESSON 99: FILTER DATA

          Let’s say you want to analyze intraday information for the S&P 500 Index
          futures. Now your spreadsheet will look different as you download data
          from sources such as your real-time charting application. Your first col-
          umn will be date, your second column will be time of day, and your next
          columns will be open, high, low, and closing prices. If you so select, the
          next column can be trading volume for that time period (one-minute, five-
          minute, hourly, and so on).
              Suppose you want to see how the S&P 500 market has behaved at a
          certain time of day. What we will need to do is filter out that time of day
          from the mass of downloaded data and only examine that subset. Instead of
          sorting data, which has been a mainstay of our investigations to this point,
          we will use Excel’s filter function.
              To illustrate how we might do this, we’ll start with a simple question.
          Suppose we want to know how trading volume for the current first half-
          hour of trading compares with the average trading volume for that cor-
          responding half-hour over the prior 20 days of trading. This will give us
          a rough sense of market activity, which correlates positively with price
          volatility. The volume also gives a relative sense for the participation of
          large, institutional traders. If, say, we observe a break out of a range during
          the first 30 minutes of trading, it is helpful to know whether or not these
          large market-moving participants are on board.


              Volume analyses can help you identify who is in the market.
