P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          290                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          coach: much of your success will come from the hours you put into recruit-
          ing new talent, practicing, and planning.
                Your assignment for this lesson is to treat yourself as a trading sys-
          tem, so that you can research, research, research your performance over
          various markets and market conditions. For this assignment, pay particu-
          lar attention to the kinds of trades that make you most of your money. Do
          they occur at particular times of day, or in particular market conditions?
          Do they occur primarily in a few markets or stock names? Are they primar-
          ily short-term trades or longer-term ones? Are they mostly reversal trade,
          or are they trend following? Your goal is to clearly identify your bread and
          butter as a trader, so that you can allocate most of your risk to what you
          do best and reduce the risk associated with trades that are outside your
          wheelhouse. Understand what you do—especially what you do best—as
          it is the most effective means for developing and sustaining confidence in
          your work. Weekly and monthly reviews of each of your trades by cate-
          gories are a great start in this direction.


                     COACHING CUE

          Track the number of trades you place that break even or that make or lose only
          a small amount of money. Many times, this is a sign of good discipline in cutting
          losers (although it can also reveal problems with exiting winning trades far too
          early). Recognize quickly when a trade is wrong to help keep the average size of
          losing trades below that of winners, an essential ingredient of trading success.




          LESSON 88: ATTITUDES AND GOALS,
          THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF SUCCESS

          Ray Barros wears many hats as a money manager, trader, blog writer, book
          author, and trading coach. He is one of the very few coaches that I know
          who incorporates a keen awareness of psychology with a sound under-
          standing of markets. His Trading Success blog (www.tradingsuccess.com/
          blog) is notable for trading and psychological insights, and his book The
          Nature of Trends is an excellent tool for mentorship. It explains his ways
          of analyzing markets, his risk/money management ideas, and his trading
          psychology tools.
              John Forman similarly combines a wealth of roles. An athletic coach,
          he also mentors traders and offers his insights in The Essentials of
          Trading blog (www.theessentialsoftrading.com/Blog). His book by that
          same name is an excellent introduction and orientation to markets, with
