P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          264                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          and the ongoing flow of ideas, extinction is a real threat—as it is for any
          business that fails to keep up with the marketplace.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to set a goal and plan for becom-
          ing just a bit more creative in your approach to markets. You don’t have
          to be a system developer to learn about learning, build upon your distinc-
          tive strengths, and fertilize your creativity within a network of colleagues.
          For your assignment, I encourage you to add just one source of new ideas
          that will add to and challenge your own. This source can be a web site,
          a newsletter, or a peer trader—but it should be a source that you can
          consult as a regular part of your generation of trading ideas. Henry freely
          shares his experience on his site, including a framework for testing trading
          ideas; making use of the fruits of his self-coaching will be invaluable for
          your own.


                     COACHING CUE

          When we’re successful, our work expresses who we are. Henry emphasizes
          that he is a builder and creator. How does your trading express who you are:
          your greatest talents and interests? Identify the recent times in the markets
          when you have been your happiest and most fulﬁlled. What made those times
          special? How can you bring those special elements into your trading more
          regularly?




          LESSON 82: I ALONE AM RESPONSIBLE

          Chris Czirnich, author of the Globetrader blog (www.globetrader
          .blogspot.com), was one of the first contributors I considered for this chap-
          ter. Uniquely among market writers, Chris is sensitive to the psychology of
          trading. His blog consistently combines market insights and psychological
          ones; it’s a useful resource.
               I posed the three-pronged question to Chris, asking him what has been
          most helpful for his self-coaching as a trader. The floodgates opened and
          Chris came up with 10 ideas, not three. His response was so well consid-
          ered that I decided to summarize all 10 of his insights and their implications
          for self-coaching:

           1. Being able to observe myself.
           2. Discipline.
           3. Having an edge.
