P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          116                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              Change starts when you stop yourself from doing what doesn’t
              work.

               A major point from The Psychology of Trading is that the key to dis-
          rupting problem patterns is to alter the state that you’re in when those
          problems first appear. This means that it’s important to become vigilant
          to the emergence of patterns, recognizing the characteristic ways that they
          appear. For example, some of my worst trading occurs when I focus on
          my P/L as the trade is unfolding. This focus may lead me to tolerate larger
          than normal losses in a small position, because it’s not hurting me, or it
          may lead me to take profits too quickly on a large position to book a sure
          gain. I’ve learned that if I start counting profits during the trade, I need to
          refocus my attention. I accomplish this by turning briefly from the screen,
          fixing my gaze on something nearby, and taking a few deep breaths. Once
          I’m in a new state—more calm and focused—I find it easier to be detached
          from the P/L and let the trade unfold in its planned manner.
               Another quick way of shifting state is simply to walk away from the
          screen temporarily and engage in a quick activity unrelated to trading.
          Some activities might be a few stretches or exercises; talking with a fel-
          low trader; or getting something to eat or drink. Often, doing something
          different enables you to approach situations differently: the new activity
          helps you shift your frame of thinking and feeling. I find this activity partic-
          ularly useful after taking losses: a quick walk outdoors, getting away from
          markets, allows me to return to the screen with a fresh perspective.

              When you change your physical state, you alter how you experi-
              ence the world and process information.

              Still another mode of state shifting is to write in a journal or talk aloud
          during a particular situation. The latter is especially useful if you’re trad-
          ing alone and won’t be a distraction to others if you process information
          aloud. If you write or talk about what is happening and give voice to what
          you think and feel at the time you’re thinking and feeling it, you shift from
          being a person immersed in experience to being a person observing his
          own experience. If you’re an active trader, in and out of markets quickly,
          you may not have time to write out journal entries and observe yourself
          in that manner. Talking aloud, however, can be accomplished while still
          watching the screen; in fact, that’s how many traders in Chicago work with
          me during the trading day: they talk aloud about what is happening while
          they are engaged in trading.
              To use my example from above, if I talk aloud my thoughts about my
          P/L while I’m in a trade, that alerts me to the fact that I’m no longer focused
