P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          224                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Worry occurs when we anticipate an adverse outcome and its conse-
          quences. We can worry about missing an opportunity or about being wrong
          in a trade. We can worry about the future of our trading career or, some-
          times, worries from personal life outside of trading can affect decision-
          making. It is common, for instance, for young traders to experience more
          stress after they have married, had children, or purchased a new home.
          With the added financial responsibilities come worries.
               Worry is problematic for traders for several reasons:
            r It undercuts confidence. It is difficult to maintain optimism and fo-
              cus on progress while anticipating negative outcomes.
            r It interferes with concentration. Thought and emotion directed to-
              ward worries are taken away from tracking market patterns.
            r It leads to impulsive decisions. For most people, worry is so nox-
              ious that they will take action to reduce their concerns. Such action is
              not necessarily in the best interest of one’s trading account.
            r It is not productive. Rarely does worry lead to concrete, constructive
              problem solving. Worrying about negative outcomes does not generally
              help people achieve positive ones.
               It is difficult to make sense of worry from a behavioral vantage point.
          No one truly enjoys worry, so it is unclear why the behavior persists. This
          is especially puzzling for chronic worriers. They do not enjoy focusing on
          negative things and typically are not happy people. So what keeps them
          worrying?

              Visualizing worst-case scenarios and how you would handle them
              is constructive; worry reinforces a sense of hopelessness and help-
              lessness in the face of those scenarios.

              To make sense of worry, let’s review the difference between thinking
          about a negative event and actually experiencing that event. I can think
          about losing money in my trading and the thought does not bring partic-
          ular anxiety or concern. If, however, I vividly imagine a particular trade
          that I am planning and visualize myself taking a loss on a large position, I
          can generate palpable experiences of nervousness. Abstract thought rarely
          generates strong emotion. Imagery, on the other hand, acts as a surrogate
          for reality. Think about sexuality and nothing happens; imagine an eroti-
          cally charged scene and the body responds.
              From a behavioral vantage point, worry is a form of thinking and, as
          such, it can function as a negative reinforcer. Let’s say that I anticipate a
          stressful meeting with the risk manager at my trading firm. My underlying
          fear is that he will reduce my capital and express a loss of confidence in
