P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    15:45    Printer: Yet to come




                                     Preface


                he goal of The Daily Trading Coach is to teach you as much as possi-

         T      ble about coaching, so that you can mentor yourself to success in the
                financial markets. The key word in the title is “Daily.” This book is de-
         signed to be a resource that you can use every day to build upon strengths
         and overcome weaknesses.
              After writing two books—The Psychology of Trading and Enhancing
         Trader Performance—and penning more than 1,800 posts for the Trader-
         Feed blog (www.traderfeed.blogspot.com/), I thought I had pretty well cov-
         ered the terrain of trading psychology. Now, just three years after the pub-
         lication of the performance book, I’ve once again taken electronic pen to
         paper, completing a trading psychology trilogy by focusing on the process
         of coaching.
              Two realities led to The Daily Trading Coach. First, a review of the
         traffic patterns on the TraderFeed blog revealed that a large number of
         readers—about a third—were accessing the site during the hour or so im-
         mediately prior to the market open. I found this interesting, as most of the
         posts do not offer specific trading advice. Rather, posts deal with topics of
         psychology and performance—ones that should be relevant at any hour of
         the day.
              When I asked a group of trusted readers about this pattern, they re-
         sponded that they were using the blog as a kind of surrogate trading
         coach. Reviewing the posts was their way of reminding themselves of their
         plans and intentions before going entering the financial battlefield. This
         was confirmed when I gathered statistics about the most popular (and com-
         mented upon) posts on the blog. The majority were practical posts dealing
         with trading psychology. Most were uplifting in content, even as they chal-
         lenged the assumptions of readers. It seemed as though traders were look-
         ing for coaching and finding some measure of it in the blog.
              The second reality shaping this book involves digital publication and
         the rapid changes sweeping the publishing world. To this point, relatively
         few electronic books (e-books) have been offered to traders. When those
         books are available, they are little more than screen versions of the print


                                                                                    xiii
