P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          56                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Had I told myself that this was the only job for me and that I needed the
          position badly, the pressure would have been intense. I would have been
          far too nervous to joke in the interview and probably would have come
          across as wooden and not very personable. If I had viewed the possibility
          of losing the job as a catastrophe, I would have ensured that I could not
          have interviewed well.
               Traders engage in their own catastrophizing. Instead of viewing loss as
          a normal, expectable part of performing under conditions of uncertainty,
          traders regard losses as a threat to their self-perceptions or livelihood.
          When traders make money, they feel bright about the future and good
          about themselves. When they hit a string of losing days, they become con-
          sumed with the loss. Instead of trading for profits, they trade to not lose
          money. Like the anxious job interviewer, traders can no longer perform
          their skills naturally and automatically.
               A common mistake that traders make is to try to replace catastrophic,
          negative thoughts with positive ones. They try repeating affirmations that
          they will make money, and they keep talking themselves into positive ex-
          pectations. What happens, however, is that they are still allowing a focus on
          the outcome of performance to interfere with performing itself. The expert
          performer does not think positively or negatively about a performance
          as it’s occurring. Rather, he is wholly absorbed in the act of perform-
          ing. Does a skilled stage actress focus on the reaction of the audience or
          the next day comments of reviewers? Does an expert surgeon become ab-
          sorbed in thoughts of the success or failure of the procedure? No, what
          makes them elite performers is that their full concentration is devoted to
          the execution of their skills.


               Thinking positively or negatively about performance outcomes
               will interfere with the process of performing. When you focus on
               the doing, the outcomes take care of themselves.


              What gives these expert performers the confidence to stay absorbed is
          not positive thinking. Rather, they know that they are capable of handling
          setbacks when those occur. If a given night’s performance doesn’t go quite
          right, the actress knows that she can make improvements in rehearsal. If
          a surgery develops complications, the surgeon knows that he can identify
          those rapidly and take care of them. By taking the catastrophe out of
          negative outcomes, these experts are able to avoid crippling performance
          anxiety.
              One of the most powerful tools I’ve found for overcoming performance
          anxiety in trading is to keep careful track of my worst trading days and
          make conscious efforts to turn those into learning experiences. This turns
          losing into an opportunity for self-coaching, not just a failure.
