P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               109

               Think of football, basketball, and tennis coaches. Every practice ses-
          sion teaches skills, offers feedback, and supplies motivation. It’s not a bad
          formula for self-coaching as well. You are most likely to change a nega-
          tive thought or behavior pattern when you associate it with concrete costs
          and consequences; you’re most likely to motivate a positive behavior by
          attaching to it specific, felt benefits.

                     COACHING CUE

          Eﬀorts at self-change break down when people start to make exceptions and al-
          low themselves to revert to old ways. To accept exceptions, you have to accept
          the old, negative patterns. It’s when our old patterns become thoroughly unac-
          ceptable that we are most likely to sustain change. When you keep a journal,
          you want to cultivate an attitude, not just jot down bloodless summaries of what
          you do. If you don’t see plenty of emotion words in your journal—constructively
          expressed—the odds are that your journal will summarize your changes but not
          motivate them.




          LESSON 34: SET EFFECTIVE GOALS

          Successful coaching requires a focus for change. Many self-help efforts
          among traders fail because they are unfocused. One day the trader writes
          in a journal about position sizing and works on that; the next day he
          emphasizes emotional control; and the following day he stresses taking
          losses quicker. By jumping from one focus to another, no single direction is
          sustained.
              This is problematic because most learning does not occur all at once.
          We know from research that learning typically requires many trials and
          considerable feedback. If we think about important skills that we’ve
          learned—from using a computer to driving a car—we can see that trial and
          error has been the norm. I can study a map of a new city for a long time
          and learn quite a bit, but I ultimately only learn to find my way around by
          driving on various roads, following signs, getting lost, and recognizing land-
          marks. If we pursue this learning intentionally—organizing our trials over
          a concentrated period of time with immediate feedback throughout—we
          can greatly shorten our learning curves. It’s easier to learn to play a piano
          by practicing every day and taking lessons every week than by engaging in
          occasional efforts spread over years.

              The training of an Olympic athlete is a study in proper skill
              development: intensive work on specific aspects of performance,
