P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          212                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          trading. When we slow ourselves down through deep, rhythmical breath-
          ing, it is difficult to be simultaneously speeded up and excited. The careful
          breathing thus acts as a dampener on extreme emotion. It reinforces self-
          control and discipline at the most elemental level.
               In my own trading, I’ve found that problematic trading tends to occur
          when I am physically tense, especially when I tense the muscles of my fore-
          head. I rarely knit my eyebrows and wrinkle my forehead when I am com-
          fortable in a situation. Conversely, I am prone to headaches and associate
          forehead muscle tension with tension headaches, which can pose a consid-
          erable distraction. By purposely keeping my forehead relaxed—widening
          my eyes slightly and going into a temporary stare—as I maintain the slow,
          deep breathing, I can sustain a state incompatible with the ones that oc-
          cur when I’m on edge. Instead of waiting to become tense or nervous and
          then performing exercises to reduce these feelings, I proactively pursue
          and maintain an incompatible state before problematic trading occurs.


              Control the arousal level of the body as a powerful means of con-
              trolling the arousal level of the mind.

               I can often recognize my physical level of tension by my seating po-
          sition. When I am comfortable, confident, and relaxed, I sit in the chair
          firmly, with my lower back and behind flush with the seat back. When mar-
          ket events trigger a stress response, however, I find myself leaning forward,
          with my seat near the end of the chair. Over time, this position gives me
          a backache in my lower back. I know that I’m not comfortable with my
          trading or with the markets when I feel that pain. Often, I’ll readjust my
          seating, reorient my breathing, and find it easier to view the markets from
          a different—and more promising—angle.
               The principle of incompatibility can also extend to thinking behaviors.
          Cognitive-behavioral work treats thinking as a discrete behavior that can
          be conditioned and modified just like any muscular behavior. If we tend to
          engage in negative thinking during trading, we can enter a mode of think-
          ing that is incompatible with negativity before trading problems occur. I
          frequently have one of my cats sitting beside me as I’m trading, usually
          Gina. It’s nearly impossible for me to become consumed with negative or
          angry thoughts when I am petting Gina. She alternates between licking me
          and rubbing her face against mine, all the while purring loudly and making
          kneading movements with her front paws. Stroking the cat helps me stay
          in touch with loving, caring feelings that are incompatible with the nastier
          emotions that can emerge during frustrating market periods.
               One of the states that is most disruptive to my trading is what I would
          call a chaotic state, in which I feel as though I’m a step behind markets,
