P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          14                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          think, but also to think about your thinking. Incorporate a fresh look at self
          and markets each day to inspire new ideas, challenge stale ones, and tap
          sources of energy and inspiration that otherwise remain hidden in routine.
          As with my adventure in Queens, you may find that the most exotic changes
          bring out your finest adaptations.


                     COACHING CUE

          Many times it’s the market views we most scorn that we need to take most
          seriously, because at some level we’re ﬁnding them threatening. Seek out com-
          mentary from those you most disagree with and ask yourself what you would be
          seeing in the markets if that commentary proves to be correct. If you’re quick
          to dismiss a market view, give it a second look. You wouldn’t need to be so de-
          fensive if you didn’t sense something plausible—and dangerous—in the views
          you’re dismissing.



          LESSON 5: TRANSFORM EMOTION BY
          TRACE-FORMATION

          When traders seek coaching, they are usually troubled by a particular emo-
          tional state that affects their decision-making: anger, frustration, anxiety,
          or doubt. Their goal is to change how they feel, but they don’t know how to
          accomplish that. Sometimes traders even view their emotions as fixed and
          unchanging aspects of personality: “It’s just the way I am.”
              It is true that our traits and temperaments affect how we experience
          the world. They also play an important role in defining the range of our
          emotions. Some people feel things—good and bad—very strongly; others
          are quite even-keeled. Neuroticism, the tendency to experience negative
          emotions, is one of the big five personality traits identified by researchers.
          Like all such traits, it has a strong hereditary component. Though we like
          to think of ourselves as masters of our fates, the sobering reality is that
          much of our emotional experience is hardwired.
              Does that mean we can’t change how we feel in particular situa-
          tions? Not at all. If psychological methods can help people overcome post-
          traumatic stresses and anxiety disorders, they certainly can help us master
          our feelings in normal life situations. For the most part, we cannot change
          personality, but we can change how our personalities are expressed.
              The trap many traders fall into is trying to control feelings with
          thoughts. We attempt to talk ourselves into feeling better or differently.
          Rarely does that work. When people are grieving over losses, telling
          them they’ll be okay doesn’t really touch what they’re experiencing. The
