P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                           171

          feel the horror of literally losing control of your mind and behavior. Much
          of the motivation to change faulty schemas will come from the awareness
          of the pain they inflict in all aspects of your life.

              Automatic thoughts don’t just enter our mind; they take over. We
              change when we sustain the motivation to stay in control of our
              minds.

               We’ve seen that reviewing your self-talk via audio or video recording
          and tracking your most extreme emotions during trading can alert you to
          your stinkin’ thinkin’. Another powerful tool to help identify problematic
          schemas and thought patterns is to review your absolute worst trading de-
          cisions. Your worst trading decisions may or may not be your largest losing
          trades; they could be occasions in which you simply missed a golden op-
          portunity. You’ll know your worst trading decisions by your reaction to
          them, “How could I have done that?” That reaction is a fantastic tell, indi-
          cating that you truly were not in your proper mindset when you made the
          poor decision. At some level, when you’re mystified how you could have
          been so mistaken or boneheaded, you are recognizing that your mind had
          been hijacked.
               Once you identify these worst trades—and this will require a review of
          your journal, as well as a look back on your recent trading experience—you
          then want to re-create the thoughts and feelings that led to the faulty
          decision-making. Normally we like to put such episodes behind us, with
          a simple reassurance that next time we’ll trade with better discipline and
          preparation. But in this exercise, you want to perform a psychological au-
          topsy and exhume your faulty decision-making process in all its gory detail.
          What were you thinking at the time? What were you feeling? What were you
          trying to avoid or accomplish with your trading decision?
               The common thoughts and feelings during these poor trading
          episodes will be your clue as to the schemas that were being activated
          at the time. Perhaps it was a safety schema: you were telling yourself that
          you could not afford to lose paper profits or to take a particular risk. Alter-
          natively, it could have been a self-worth schema, as you told yourself how
          great it would be if this trade hit a home run. Your feelings during these
          trades—the fear, the overconfidence—will provide valuable clues as to the
          automatic thoughts that were generated.

              Our worst trades come from reacting to our automatic thoughts
              instead of markets themselves.

               In my own trading, a common schema that is activated is a variation
          of the safety theme: avoid danger. To be sure, this can be a useful mode at
