P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          68                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          deal of things to different people; my experience is that it is only weakly
          correlated with how hard traders actually work at their craft. Traders who
          are desperate for profits, traders who approach markets addictively like
          gamblers, traders who live and breathe markets 24/7: all may claim a spe-
          cial passion for what they do. These passions may or may not support good
          trading and a positive learning curve. Desire and motivation are necessary,
          but not sufficient, for trading success.
               Rather than focus on passion, traders would do well to reflect upon
          the overall emotional tone of their market experience. In researching and
          trading markets, as well as working on trading skills, do you experience
          meaningful happiness, contentment, and motivation? Are you truly enjoy-
          ing what you’re doing?
               This positive side of emotional experience is what psychologists refer
          to as psychological well-being. A person with high well-being experiences
          the following on a frequent basis:
            r A positive mood (happiness).
            r Favorable expectations (optimism).
            r A positive physical state (energy).
            r A positive appraisal of self and life (fulfillment).
            r Favorable relations with others (affection).

               None of us feel all of these things all of the time; indeed, many of these
          five factors may wax and wane depending upon life circumstances. Still,
          psychological research suggests that some of us experience significantly
          more well-being than others. A portion of this variation can be attributed
          to inborn personality traits that are present across a range of life circum-
          stances. Other variations can be attributed to our environment, especially
          the degree to which our settings satisfy or frustrate our needs and affirm
          or contradict our values.

               Much of psychological well-being is a function of the fit between a
               person and her social and work environments.

               When people are chronically unable to experience positive emotions,
          we might suspect the presence of an emotional disorder, such as the
          form of depression known as dysthymia. Other emotional problems, in-
          cluding anxiety disorders, can be sufficiently pervasive as to prevent peo-
          ple from experiencing joy and life satisfaction. In such circumstances,
          it is important for people to seek the assistance of an experienced, li-
          censed mental health professional. Many times, very hands-on approaches
          to therapy—sometimes in concert with medication—can make a huge dif-
          ference when chronic problems interfere with positive life experience. You
          don’t need to be actively depressed—crying, unable to get out of bed,
