P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         57


               Let’s say that you have a very reliable setup that tells you that a stock
          should be heading higher. You buy the stock and it promptly moves your
          way. Just as suddenly, however, it reverses and moves below your entry
          point. You note that the reversal occurred on significant volume, so you
          take the loss. In one frame of mind, you could lament your bad luck, curse
          the market, and pressure yourself to make up for the loss on the next trade.
          All of those negative actions will contribute to performance pressure; none
          of them will constructively aid your trading.
               Alternatively, you could use the loss to trigger a market review. Are
          other stocks in the sector selling off? Is the broad market dropping? Has
          news come out that has affected the stock, sector, or market? Did your
          buy setup occur within a larger downtrend that you missed? Did you exe-
          cute the setup too late, chasing strength? All of these questions offer the
          possibility of learning from the losing trade and quite possibly setting up
          subsequent successful trades. For instance, if you notice that a surprise
          negative earnings announcement within the sector is dragging everything
          down, you might be able to revise your view for the day on the stock and
          benefit from the weakness. When you are your own trading coach, you
          want to get to the point where you actually value good trading ideas that
          don’t work. If a market is not behaving the way it normally does in a given
          situation, it’s sending you a loud message. If you’re not executing your
          ideas the way you usually do, you’re getting a clear indication to target that
          area for improvement. A simple assignment that can instill this mindset is
          to identify—during the trading day (or during the week, if you’re typically
          holding positions overnight)—at least one very solid trading idea/setup that
          did not make you money. That good losing trade is either telling you some-
          thing about the market, something about your trading, or both. Your task is
          then to take a short break, figure out the message of the market, and make
          an adjustment in your subsequent trading.
               By acting on the idea that losses present opportunity, you take
          a good part of the threat out of losing. That keeps you learning and


                     COACHING CUE

          If you track your trading results closely over time, you’ll know your typical
          slumps and drawdowns: how long they last and how deep they become. Know
          what a slump looks like and accept that they will arise every so often to help
          take away their threat value. Many times you can recognize a slump as it’s un-
          folding and quickly cut back your trading and increase your preparation, thus
          minimizing drawdowns. Most importantly, if you accept the slump as a normal
          part of trading, it cannot generate performance anxiety. Indeed, it is often the
          slumps that push us to ﬁnd new opportunity in markets and adapt to shifting
          market conditions. Much of success consists of ﬁnding opportunity in adversity.
