P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          242                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          for example, consists of three kinds of trades: intraday trades with planned
          holding times of less than an hour; intraday swing trades with planned hold-
          ing times of greater than an hour; and overnight trades. The short intraday
          trades are based on short-term patterns of price, volume, and sentiment.
          The swing trades are trend following and are based on historical research
          that gauges the odds of taking out price levels derived from the prior day’s
          pivot points. The overnight trades are also trend following and are based on
          longer-term historical research that shows a directional edge to markets.
          These trades comprise different kinds of trades, because they are based on
          different rationales and involve different positioning in the markets. For
          instance, I can take a short-term intraday trade to the long side, but short
          the market for an overnight trade that same day.


              You can identify the inventory of your trading business by seg-
              regating trades based on what you’re trading and how you’re
              trading it.


              For other traders, the division of the trading business will be by asset
          class (rates trading versus currency trades versus equity trades) or by trad-
          ing strategy/setup (trades based on news items; trades based on opening
          gaps; trades based on relative sector strength). Relatively early in my trad-
          ing career, I broke my trades down by time of day and found very different
          metrics associated with morning, midday, and afternoon trades. That find-
          ing was instrumental in focusing my trading on the morning hours. In other
          words, the divisions of your trades should reflect anticipated differences
          in your income streams. If the returns from the trading strategies or ap-
          proaches are likely to be independent of one another, they will deserve
          their own bin for analysis by metrics.
              One of the breakdowns I’ve found most helpful in my trading is based
          on tagging the market conditions at the time of entry. To accomplish this,
          you would tag each trade based on whether it was placed in an upward
          trending market, a downward trending market, or a nontrending market.
          You will want to be consistent in how you identify market conditions; my
          own breakdowns (because I trade short-term) were simply based on how
          the current market session was trading relative to the previous one. It is
          common that traders will perform better in some market environments
          than others. For instance, based on a different breakdown, I learned that
          I was most profitable in moderate volatility markets, as tagged by the VIX
          index at the time of entry. When markets were relatively nonvolatile or
          highly volatile, my returns were significantly reduced. This was useful to
          me in knowing when and where to take risk.
