P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          40                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 13: WHAT CAUSES THE
          DISTRESS THAT INTERFERES WITH
          TRADING DECISIONS?

          We become anxious and exit a good trade before it has an opportunity to
          reach its price target. We become frustrated and take a trade that com-
          pletely contradicts our research and planning. We’re afraid of missing a
          trade and enter at the worst possible time. We’re reluctant to take a loss at
          our designated stop point and wind up with a much larger loss.
              All of these are examples of trading behaviors for which all of us as
          traders can truly say, “been there, done that.” In trading, as in much of life,
          we learn by making the mistakes our parents and mentors try to protect
          us from. The key to longevity is making those mistakes early in your
          development, before you have too much on the line. Mistakes in dating can
          lead to a great marriage. Mistakes on a simulator can lead to solid real-time
          performance. Making your errors when your risk is lowest is a large part of
          success.
              But what causes these mistakes, in which the arousal of distress interf-
          eres with prior planning and consistent, sound decision-making? Perhaps if
          we can figure that out, we can shorten the painful learning curve just a bit.


               The fields of behavioral finance and neuroeconomics have illumi-
               nated how emotions affect financial decisions; check out refer-
               ences at the end of this chapter.


               To hear traders talk, distress in trading is caused by markets. A market
          turns slow and range-bound: that is the supposed cause of a trader’s bore-
          dom and overtrading. A market reverses direction: that allegedly generates
          frustration and impulsive trades for the trader. Because their emotions are
          triggered by a market event, traders assume that the market must be re-
          sponsible for their feelings. A moment’s thought, of course, dispels this no-
          tion. After all, if the market had the power to compel emotional reactions,
          we would see all traders respond identically in a similar situation. That,
          however, is not what happens. Not all traders respond to a slow market
          with boredom and overtrading; not all traders become frustrated and make
          impulsive decisions when a position reverses against them. There is more
          to the cause of our emotions than external events.
               In order for a market event to generate a negative emotional re-
          sponse, we have to view it as a threat. Let’s say that I’m a trader watching
          my market become slow and range-bound at midday. If I view that as an
          opportunity to update some of my ideas and prepare for the afternoon,
          the slow market will not trouble me in the least. Similarly, I may view the
          choppy, thin action as an opportunity to get away from the screen, clear
