P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          34                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          assured when we operate in such environments. If minimal stress is your
          objective, trading should not be your vocation or avocation.
               Many traders—and trading coaches—confuse stress and distress. Not
          all psychological stress brings distress, and not all psychological stress
          is bad. If you are going to coach yourself for trading success, it’s impor-
          tant that you understand stress: how it helps performance, and how it can
          become distress and interfere with decision-making.
               So let’s start with an everyday example. You’re driving on a highway on
          a long trip, and you’re feeling a bit bored. Suddenly the wind picks up and
          snowfall becomes heavy. Your visibility is greatly reduced, and you can feel
          the road becoming slippery. Before you know it, you’re hunched over the
          steering wheel, staring intently through the windscreen and reducing your
          speed. Your boredom has quickly turned into alertness. You’re no longer
          operating on auto-pilot.
               This is psychological stress: a heightened physical and cognitive state
          that prepares us for dealing with challenges. It’s been called the flight or
          fight response, because it mobilizes mind and body to avoid challenging
          situations or to face them head on. Muscle tension, alertness, and the flow
          of adrenaline: these are but a few cues that we’ve entered a state of stress.
               Note that this is an adaptive state in the example of driving in the snow-
          storm. Had you remained on autopilot, you might not have slowed your
          speed and taken measures to avoid an accident. The state of stress has
          mobilized your energy—shifted you from your boredom—to cope with the
          immediate situation. You can appreciate how silly it is to talk of minimizing
          stress in such a situation: when you’re in a blinding snowstorm in a moving
          vehicle, your mind and body should mobilize!


               Stress is a mobilization of mind and body; it can facilitate perfor-
               mance.

              But let’s take our example one step farther. I lived in the Syracuse,
          New York, area for more than 20 years, so the snowstorm is challenging,
          but not unfamiliar. I’ve experienced similar conditions before, and I know
          what to do when they arise. My stress never becomes distress, because I
          never perceive the storm as an acute threat.
              Suppose, however, I am from Florida and have never experienced such
          a storm. I’ve heard of cars getting into pileup accidents under those condi-
          tions, and I’m worried that my tires will lose their grip. The storm is highly
          threatening for me; I don’t feel capable of mastering it. My stress quickly
          becomes distress, as alertness turns into anxiety.
              The simple example of the car illustrates that perception and expe-
          rience make the difference between stress and distress. When I was an
          undergraduate at Duke University, David Aderman and I performed an
