P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          308                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 91: USE HISTORICAL
          PATTERNS IN TRADING

          A trading guru declares that he has turned bearish because the S&P 500
          Index has fallen below its 200-day average. Is this a reasonable basis for
          setting your trading or investing strategy? Is there truly an edge to selling
          the market when it moves below its moving averages?
               The only way we can determine the answer is through investigation.
          Otherwise, investing and trading become little more than exercises in faith
          and superstition. Because markets have behaved in a particular way in the
          past does not guarantee that they will act that way now. Still, history pro-
          vides the best guide we have. Markets, like people, will never be perfectly
          predictable. But if we’ve observed people over time in different conditions,
          we can arrive at some generalizations about their tendencies. Similarly,
          a careful exploration of markets under different historical conditions can
          help us find regularities worth exploiting.
               As it turns out, moving average strategies—so often touted in the pop-
          ular trading press—are not so robust. As of my writing this, since 1980, the
          average 200-day gain in the S&P 500 Index following occasions when we’ve
          traded above the 200-day moving average has been 8.68 percent. When
          we’ve been below the 200-day moving average, the next 200 days in the S&P
          500 Index have returned 7.32 percent. That’s not a huge difference, and it’s
          hardly grounds to turn bearish on a market. When David Aronson tested
          more than 6,000 technical indicators for his excellent book, Evidence-
          Based Technical Analysis, he found a similar lack of robustness: not a sin-
          gle indicator emerged as a significant predictor of future market returns.

              Investigate before you invest: Common trading wisdom is uncom-
              monly wrong.

               One way that historical patterns aid our self-coaching is by helping us
          distinguish myth from fact. “The trend is your friend” we commonly hear.
          My research on the blog, however, has consistently documented worse
          returns following winning days, weeks, and months than following los-
          ing ones. It is not enough to accept market wisdom at face value: just as
          you would research the reliability of a vehicle before making a purchase, it
          makes sense to research the reliability and validity of trading strategies.
               There are traders who make the opposite mistake and trade mechani-
          cally from historical market patterns. I have seen an unusual proportion of
          these traders blow up. Market patterns are relative to the historical period
          that we study. If I examine the past few years of returns in a bull mar-
          ket, I will find significant patterns that will completely vanish in a bear
