P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         53

          specific dashboard light, you might want to stop driving altogether and take
          the car into a repair shop. That’s like exiting the market: the risk is just too
          great to proceed.
               When nervousness hits, the first thing you want to do is simply ac-
          knowledge that fact. Saying to yourself, “I am not comfortable with the
          trade right now,” cues you to extract the information from your experi-
          ence. The next step is to ask, “Why am I not comfortable? Has something
          important changed in the trade?”
               This latter question is crucial because it helps you distinguish realis-
          tic fear from normal anxiety you might feel in an unfamiliar or uncertain
          situation. I recently bumped up my average trading size per position and,
          at first, felt some nervousness in my trades. When I asked myself, “Why
          am I nervous?” I couldn’t find anything wrong with the trades: they were
          performing as expected. This led me to acknowledge that I was just feeling
          some anxiety about the increased risk per trade. I reassured myself of my
          stop levels and overall trading plan, so I was able to weather the anxiety
          and benefit from the increased risk. I needed to carry out that internal dia-
          logue, however, to see if my body’s warning light—the nervousness—was
          based on a market problem or a problem of perception.


              Fear is a warning light; not an automatic guide to action. It is our
              mind and body’s way of saying, “Something doesn’t look right.”


               Similarly, if you’re experiencing fear about entering a position, you
          want to ask, “Why am I uncomfortable with this idea? Do I really have an
          edge in this trade?” This questioning prods you to review the rationale for
          the trade idea: Is it going with the market trend? Can it be executed with a
          favorable reward-to-risk balance? Is it a pattern that I have traded success-
          fully in the past? Is it occurring in a market environment with sufficient
          volume and volatility?
               When I work with a trader in live mode (i.e., coaching them while they
          are trading), I have them talk aloud so that I can hear their thought process
          regarding a particular trade idea. I mirror back to traders the quality of their
          thinking about their decisions, so I can help them figure out when nervous-
          ness is warranted (the trade doesn’t really have favorable expectancies)
          and when it might not be (it’s a good idea, but you’re feeling uncertain be-
          cause you’re in a slump).
               When you are your own trading coach, you can place yourself in talk-
          aloud mode as well or—if you’re trading in a room with other traders, as at
          many prop firms—you can use a brief checklist to review the status of your
          idea or trade. The checklist would simply be a short listing of the factors
          that should either get you into a trade or keep you in a trade. It’s your way
          of using the nervousness to differentiate discomfort with a good idea and
