P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           301


          Daily/Weekly Analysis
          “When advancers recently outnumbered decliners by more than a 3:1 mar-
          gin on the NYSE and the market continued to push higher over the next few
          sessions,” Rennie recounts, “I brought up the Master Spreadsheet where I
          conduct all of my testing and research. It contains the daily data back to
          1980 and weekly data back to 1950 on all of the major averages and all of
          the market internals (breadth, volume, new highs/lows, etc.) to make test-
          ing quick and easy. In this case, I searched for instances when the S&P
          was higher three days after a 3:1 positive breadth session and examined
          the market’s performance over the next two weeks. Such lopsided breadth
          days can mark buying climaxes, in which buying power is exhausted and
          the market trades lower short-term. But when the market remains on firm
          ground in the days following such a lopsided positive breadth session, I
          would expect the S&P to continue moving higher over the next two weeks.”
               Rennie Yang explains how to conduct this analysis: “To keep things
          simple, let’s assume I have a spreadsheet containing daily S&P 500 and
          NYSE advance/decline data. Column A has the date, while columns B and
          C contain the daily S&P 500 closing price and NYSE advance/decline ra-
          tio, respectively. Starting at the fifth row in column D, enter the following
          formula:

                              = if(and(c2 > 3, b5 > b2),(b15-b5)/b5,””)

              “This states: if the advance/decline ratio from three days ago was over
          3.0 and the S&P closed above its three-day ago close, show the percentage
          gain for the S&P over the next ten trading days. Fill this column down to
          the point where the data ends and quickly scan the results. You can imme-
          diately see that the hypothesis seems correct. Over the last 30 examples,
          the S&P has been higher 10 trading days later in 25 out of 30 cases, or
          83 percent of the time.”


              To get a sense for whether an edge is present, it is important to
              compare a historical pattern over X days with the market’s general
              tendency over X days.


              “That may look like a bullish edge,” Rennie points out, “but first you
          need to check the S&Ps at-any-time odds of posting a higher close 10 trad-
          ing days later. Here’s a quick and easy method. Go back to the fifth row
          in Column D of the sample spreadsheet above and change the formula to
          read “=if(b15>b5,1,’’’’).” This means that if the S&Ps close two weeks later
          is greater than today’s closing S&P, print a one, otherwise print noth-
          ing. Then fill this column down to the point where the data ends. In most
