P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                  97


              When you track how you cope when you are trading well, you cre-
          ate a mental model of your best ways of handling trading challenges.
          This model can then become a script that you can draw on during times
          of difficulty. Make a coping checklist a part of your daily journal; it will
          alert you to behavior patterns that you can build on for the next market
          challenge.



                     COACHING CUE

          Think of your best and worst coping patterns as being sequences of actions,
          not just isolated strategies. Thus, for instance, when I’m coping well, I ﬁrst
          take steps to calm myself and get focused; then I engage in concrete prob-
          lem solving. I best cope with losses by analyzing them to death—ﬁguring out
          what went wrong—and then drawing positive learning lessons from those. When
          I’m coping poorly, I don’t calm myself, and blame myself instead, adding a
          second bad trade to the ﬁrst as a way of making up for the loss. In my poor
          coping mode, I don’t analyze my losers, instead turning my attention to more
          promising markets, instruments, or setups. That ensures that I’ll learn noth-
          ing from my loss—and that my error will repeat itself at some juncture. Think
          of coping as sequences of behaviors, so we can develop mental blueprints
          for the actions we need to take in the most challenging market conditions.
          This helps ensure that trading stress does not generate performance-robbing
          distress.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of stress and distress at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          3: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-three-links.html
               One of the early texts summarizing research into positive psychology
          is Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, edited by Daniel
          Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz and published by the Russell
          Sage Foundation (1999). Another worthwhile reference work is the Hand-
          book of Positive Psychology, edited by C.R. Snyder and Shane J. Lopez and
          published by Oxford University Press (2003) and, by those same authors,
          Positive Psychology: The Scientific and Practical Explorations of Human
          Strengths (Sage Publications, 2006).
