P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008     13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         135

            r Themes of achievement/hopefulness and failure/discouragement.
            r Themes of recognition and rejection.
            r Themes of contentment/acceptance and anger/frustration.
            r Themes of safety and danger.

              If the markets are making you feel the way you’ve felt during some
          of your life’s valley experiences, consider the possibility that you’ve been
          caught in a web of repetitive conflict and coping. Recognizing that web
          and keeping it firmly in mind is half the battle of changing it. As your own
          trading coach, you want to be mindful in your trading, not unconsciously
          repeating your past. It is much more difficult to fall into old, destructive
          patterns when you’re clear on what those patterns are.


                      COACHING CUE

          So often, we’re ﬁghting the last psychological battle. Identify the most recent
          conﬂicted relationship experience in your life and the thoughts, feelings, and
          behaviors evoked by that relationship. Then take a look at your most recent trad-
          ing diﬃculties to see if similar thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are involved.
          Many times, it’s not just early childhood relationships that color our current
          behavior, but the most recent sets of conﬂicts. Identifying how you resolved
          those problems in the relationship (or are taking steps to resolve them if they
          are current) can be very helpful in minimizing their spillover into trading.




          LESSON 42: CRYSTALLIZE OUR
          REPETITIVE PATTERNS

          In the previous lesson, we used sine wave charts to identify peak and valley
          experiences from our life histories and from our trading. Once we have the
          sense that there are, indeed, commonalities, the next step is to crystallize
          these patterns so that we clearly understand why they exist and how they
          repeat themselves.
               First, however, let’s address the question of what it means if you can-
          not find common themes across the peaks and valleys of your charted ex-
          perience. One possibility is that you need to draw more peaks and valleys
          on each chart before the themes will become salient. Another is that you
          are looking at the events logically, not psychologically. Examine the peaks
          and valleys for similarities of motivation and emotion, not surface detail.
          Many times the common elements will jump out when we think of the pat-
          terns as emotional recurrences.
