P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          312                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              As you might suspect, a database can get large quickly. With a column
          in a spreadsheet for each of the following: date, open price, high price,
          low price, closing price, volume, rate of change, and several variables
          (indicators) that you track, you can have a large sheet for each stock or
          futures contract that you trade—particularly if you are archiving intraday
          data. I strongly recommend that beginners at this kind of historical
          investigation get their feet wet with daily data. This process will keep
          the data sets manageable and will be helpful in framing longer timeframe
          hypotheses that can supplement intraday observation and judgment. Many
          good swing patterns can be found with daily data and clean, affordable
          data are readily available.


              Some of the most promising historical patterns occur over a period
              of several days to several weeks.

               There are several possible sources for your historical database. Many
          real-time platforms archive considerable historical data on their servers.
          You can download these data from programs such as e-Signal and Real Tick
          (two vendors I’ve personally used) and update your databases manually at
          the end of the trading day. The advantage of this solution is that it keeps
          you from the expense of purchasing historical data from vendors. It also
          enables you to capture just the data you want in the way you want to store
          them. This is how I collect most of my intraday data for stock index futures
          and such variables as NYSE TICK. My spreadsheet is laid out in columns in
          ways that I find intuitive. The entire process of updating a sheet, including
          built in charts, takes a few minutes at most.
               A second way you can go, which I also use, is to purchase his-
          torical data from a vendor. I obtain daily data from Pinnacle Data
          (www.pinnacledata.com), which includes an online program for updating
          that is idiot-proof. Many of their data fields go back far in market history,
          and many of them cover markets and indicators that I would not be able
          to easily archive on my own. The data are automatically saved in Excel
          sheets, with a separate sheet for each data element. That means that you
          have to enter the different sheets and pull out all the data relevant to a par-
          ticular hypothesis and time frame. The various fields can be copied onto a
          single worksheet that you can use for your historical investigations (more
          on this later). Among the data that I find useful from Pinnacle Data are
          advance-decline information; new highs/lows; volume (including up/down
          volume); interest rates; commodity and currency prices; and weekly data.
          These data are general market data, not data for individual equities. When
          I collect individual equity data, I generally find the historical data from the
          real-time quotation platforms to be adequate to my needs.
