P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          72                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          everything comes together and I’m able to make a meaningful difference
          in someone’s life—those are affirmations that carry me through many ses-
          sions of slow, gradual, difficult work. Similarly, to prepare a challenging
          trade idea, execute it with a plan, and then see it make money yields a kind
          of happiness that cannot be achieved by the same profits from a dumb luck
          trade. Pride, not as in overweening arrogance, but as an inner sense of con-
          viction about the rightness of one’s choices, is an important manifestation
          of Aristotle’s happiness.
               Sadly, participation in the markets does not bring this fulfillment to
          many traders. Yes, they feel pleasure when they make money and pain
          when they lose it. But they lack the deep, inner sense of satisfaction and
          joy possible only to those who are pursuing a calling. The reason for this
          is that they are hoping that profits will bring happiness, when in fact
          the relationship works in exactly the reverse order. We profit from our
          life’s endeavors when we pursue our happiness. Just as sexual conquests
          cannot provide the happiness of a fulfilling emotional relationship and win-
          ning a lottery cannot yield the depth of experience possible to one who
          builds a business, profits on trades do not provide the primary emotional
          fuel for a trading career. They are the happy results, not the causes of
          happiness.
               Unfortunately, many traders pursue markets in ways that cannot lead
          to fulfillment. They pursue profits like a pick-up artist goes after sex. Some-
          times they score, sometimes they don’t. There is nothing cumulative in
          their efforts, however: they no more build a career than the barfly builds
          meaningful relationships. Many times, traders recognize that gnawing exis-
          tential guilt: they realize that hours upon hours in front of a screen are con-
          tributing little or no economic value, but also yielding no ongoing sense
          of meaning and satisfaction. It’s not that they’re necessarily anxious, de-
          pressed, or frustrated. They are just empty.
               We can recognize the happy trader because he is immersed in the pro-
          cess of trading and finds fulfillment from this process even when markets
          are not open. I track the traffic to the TraderFeed blog daily and have long
          noted that the visitor count drops precipitously when markets close on a
          Friday and through the weekend. After all, what fun are markets if they’re
          not open and active? This is the mindset of the trading barfly. The happy
          trader finds joy in researching and understanding markets, in preparing for
          the next day and week, in reviewing trading results and tweaking perfor-
          mance, and in generating new ideas and methods. The distinction between
          week and weekend is as immaterial for such a trader as it would be for
          a dedicated artist or laboratory scientist. Indeed, it’s not uncommon for
          these traders to increase their reading during evenings and weekends: they
          are immersed in the entire process of trading, not just the process of mak-
          ing money from trades.
