P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          276                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              elusive that it is imperative to understand market dynamics/structure
              and where my personal edge lies,” he points out. This is very impor-
              tant: As Brian’s videos illustrate, he is extremely open to information
              from the markets, but he filters out opinions. He has learned to rely
              on his own judgment and experience to maintain his advantage in the
              marketplace. This reliance is essential in building and maintaining con-
              fidence. It’s difficult to imagine sustaining the resilience to weather
              drawdowns if you don’t have a basic trust in how you process informa-
              tion and make decisions. It is better to make a mistake with your own
              judgment—and learn from that—than to make a lucky trade based on
              the tips of others.

              Review
              When you view markets and review them day after day, week after
              week, you develop an intimacy with market relationships and trading
              patterns. An internalization of this intimacy is what traders refer to as a
              feel for markets. It is not mystical inspiration; it’s the result of repeated
              exposure to information under proper learning conditions. Brian ex-
              plains, “I review hundreds of stocks using multiple timeframes in an
              attempt to find what I believe to be the lowest risk/highest potential
              trades according to my entry and exit parameters.” This review pro-
              vides him with good trade ideas, but it also feeds a learning curve. Af-
              ter so much review across multiple timeframes, he has learned what a
              good stock looks like. This internalized expertise helps him deploy his
              capital in the most efficient manner possible.


              We learn our patterns—and the patterns of markets— through in-
              tensive review. It is the intensity of the review that enables us to in-
              ternalize those patterns and become sensitive to their occurrence.


              Mental Checklist
              Here I’ll let Brian speak for himself: “This one is somewhat new and
              came about as a result of letting my guard down on a few occasions
              earlier in the year, which resulted in losses which were larger than
              what I would normally take. Each day before the market opens I go
              through a mental checklist of: how do I feel (tired, anxious, excited,
              etc.) to identify any possible weakness before I commit money. I also
              try to visualize how I will react to what I view as either normal or ab-
              normal trading conditions. I am trying to spend more time on the men-
              tal preparation than I have in the past and it seems to be working well
