P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          228                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          support. It is no different in any business: an entrepreneur has to at least
          make enough to cover the overhead to stay afloat.
               Many businesses fail because they lack adequate startup capital and
          cannot keep their overhead under tight control. They don’t realize how
          long it will take to build a large and loyal customer base. As a result, they
          burn through their cash before they can sustain breakeven operations. To
          preserve capital, they cut back on essentials such as marketing and adver-
          tising. This creates a death spiral of fewer customers, lower income, and
          further belt-tightening.
               Adequate startup capital enables the entrepreneur to make a begin-
          ner’s mistakes and address the holes in his business plan before going out
          of business. Business plans are like battle plans in times of war: they are
          indispensable, but also subject to frequent change. Without sufficient re-
          sources, businesses cannot weather those changes.


              Much of the stress that new traders experience is the result of an
              inadequate capital base: they are trying to do too much with too
              little.


               So it is with traders. When they begin their business with modest cap-
          ital, they cannot survive their learning curves when markets change and
          inevitable slumps take hold. Like failing businesses, they then begin to cut
          back on essential overhead, such as needed data and redundant systems.
          With little more to trade with than the same charts that everyone else looks
          at, the undercapitalized trader in overhead reduction mode virtually en-
          sures that she will never maintain a distinctive edge.
               So how much startup capital is sufficient for a trader? If you are just
          learning about markets, very little capital is needed to advance your learn-
          ing curve. I began trading in late 1977 with a $2,500 stock market account
          at a regional brokerage in Kansas City. That enabled me to trade 100-share
          lots of individual stocks and test out my ideas without undue risk. Now,
          with the advent of simulation platforms, as discussed in the Enhancing
          Trader Performance book, it is possible to realistically test strategies and
          gain a feel for markets without placing money at risk.
               Some commentators downplay the value of paper trading and
          simulation-based trading with live data because the psychological pres-
          sures of losing real money (and the overconfidence that comes with win-
          ning) are not present. This, however, is precisely why simulated trading
          is perfect for traders early in their development. Simulation enables the
          beginner to simply focus on the mechanics of trading and the recognition
          of trading patterns without having to worry about losing startup capital.
