P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                             105


          example, that when you’re trading well, you tend to be very problem-
          focused. When you are less successful, you trade while you are confused or
          frustrated, without waiting for clearly defined opportunity.
               The key is to look for patterns, not just isolated instances of good or
          poor trading. For each good day of trading, you might jot down several
          things you did right and then see which entries appear day after day. Sim-
          ilarly, in reviewing the poor trading days, you would write down the key
          mistakes you made and observe which ones appear over time.

              Your trading strengths can be found in the patterns that repeat
              across successful trades.

               If you cannot find patterns that stand out, you may need to monitor
          your trading over a longer period, so that you have a rich sample of good
          and poor trading days. You’re looking for common elements that jump out
          at you; don’t be too quick to read subtleties into the patterns. The best
          things to work on are the ones that are most salient—that hit you between
          the eyes. For instance, when I have done the pattern-recognition work and
          compared my best and worst trading, I found stark differences in the sizing
          of my trades (initial positions neither too large nor too small performed
          best); the timing of the trades (positions too early in the morning or later
          in the afternoon underperformed those made after the market sorted itself
          out in the first minutes of trade); and the duration of my trades (better
          performance when held shorter, with clear targets and stops). I also found
          that I traded best when I had a clear longer-term picture of the market to
          guide shorter-term entries and trades. My absolute worst trading occurred
          when I held a strong view at the start of the market day and did not modify
          the view as the day progressed, continuing to trade against a market trend.
               Notice how each of these patterns focuses a trader on what to change,
          which is the first step in deciding how to make changes. Many times,
          traders fail to make changes because they aren’t clear on what to change.
          They rely on vague generalizations (“I need to be more disciplined”) rather
          than identify specific behaviors to work on. By conducting detailed com-
          parisons between your best and worst trading, you can find a focus for your
          self-coaching efforts and channel your energies in the most constructive
          directions. If you know your patterns—those that bring you success and
          failure—you’re generally halfway home in making lasting changes. Below
          are some patterns to be especially aware of as you review your journal:
            r Emotional Patterns—Distinct differences in how you feel when
              you’re trading well and when you’re trading poorly, particularly before
              and during trades.
            r Behavioral Patterns—Notable differences in how you prepare for
              trades and manage them during your best and worst trading episodes.
