P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          238                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          Equity Curve
          Here you’re interested in the slope of your returns and changes in the slope.
          As we saw with Henry Carstens’ tools that simulate trading returns, a great
          deal of directional change in your portfolio can be attributed to chance.
          For that reason, you don’t want to overreact to every squiggle in your eq-
          uity curve, abandoning hard-won experience. Too many traders jump from
          one promised Holy Grail to another, shifting whenever they draw down.
          A far more promising framework for your self-coaching is to know the
          equity curve variation that is typical of your past trading, so that you
          can compare yourself against your own norms. If you have learned trad-
          ing properly, you will have a historical curve of your returns from simula-
          tion trading and small-size trading before you begin trading as an income-
          generating business. When your current equity curve varies meaningfully
          from your historical performance, that’s when you know you may need
          to make adjustments. If the variation is in a positive, profitable direction,
          you’ll want to isolate what is working for you so that you can take full ad-
          vantage. If the variation is creating outsized losses, you may need to cut
          your risk (reduce the size of your trades) and diagnose the problems.

              Knowing your normal performance is invaluable in identifying
              those periods when returns are significantly subnormal.


          Winning Versus Losing Trades
          This is a basic metric of how well you’re reading markets. Again, the em-
          phasis is not on hitting a particular number, but on comparing your cur-
          rent performance to your historical norms. Let’s say, for instance, you’re
          a trend follower. You tend to make money on only 40 percent of your
          trades, but you ride those winners for relatively large gains compared to
          your losers. If your win percentage suddenly drops to 25 percent, you’ll
          want to diagnose possible problems. Has your market turned choppy and
          directionless? Have you altered the way in which you’re entering trades or
          managing them? The more the drop to 25 percent is atypical of your histor-
          ical trading, the more you’ll want to enter a diagnostic mode. If, however,
          you’ve had past periods of 25 percent winners just as a function of slow,
          directionless markets, you may choose to ride things out without making
          major changes in your trading simply by focusing on markets or times of
          day with greater opportunity.

          Average Sizes of Winning and Losing Trades
          It doesn’t help to have 60 percent winning trades if the average size of your
          losers is twice that of your winners. Keeping score of the average sizes of
