P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          196                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          summarized in Enhancing Trader Performance. Pound for pound, so to
          speak, I find these the most useful methods in the coaching arsenal. Let’s
          take a look at how you can master these methods for yourself . . .


          LESSON 61: UNDERSTAND
          YOUR CONTINGENCIES

          The essence of behavioral psychology is that we share many of the learn-
          ing mechanisms found in the animal world. My cats Gina and Ginger, for
          instance, have learned that, when I get up at 5 A.M., I will give them some
          moist food for their breakfast. As soon as they hear me walking about,
          they come from wherever they’ve been sleeping and hustle into the kitchen,
          looking up at me with expectation. Because of repetition, they have learned
          to associate my walking around after a period of quiet with being fed. This
          is the essence of stimulus-response learning: animals learn to associate
          response patterns to stimulus situations. The contingencies between sit-
          uation and response are reinforced over time, strengthening the learned
          pattern.

              Much of our behavior consists of simple responses to particular
              situations.

               In traditional behaviorism, it is not necessary to explain these learned
          connections with reference to the mental states of the learners. The cats
          don’t explicitly reason that it must be morning and I am rising for the day,
          so they should go to the kitchen. Nor does reason enter their decision to
          come to the portion of the house where we keep the moist food rather than
          the dry. Rather, the stimulus of hearing me awaken triggers their anticipa-
          tion, much as hearing a particular old song may trigger associated memo-
          ries. In the cognitive restructuring approach to coaching, we look to remap
          the mind and shift the explicit thinking of traders. In the behavioral mode,
          the goal is to unlearn associative connections that bring negative outcomes
          and acquire new connections that will be more adaptive.
               In behavioral psychology, unlearning is the flip side of learning: if we
          don’t reinforce a particular contingency over time, the associative links
          are weakened, and the response patterns eventually die out. If I were to
          ring a bell each evening and feed the cats but then not feed them in the
          morning, eventually they would stop coming to the kitchen in the morning.
          Instead, they would learn to come running at the sound of the bell. You
          build a behavior pattern by reinforcing it; you divest yourself of the pattern
          by removing reinforcement.
               Many negative behavior patterns in trading, from this perspec-
          tive, occur because they are either positively reinforced or negatively
