P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          286                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          year. What did you do wrong on those days; what could you have done dif-
          ferently? What were the problems that occurred on more than one of these
          losing occasions? The idea is to embrace your fallibility by turning it into
          an engine of learning. If you clearly identify the mistakes from your worst
          trading days, you’ll be better prepared to avoid them in the future. Your
          worst trades can be your best tool for self-understanding—and your best
          guide for self-coaching.


                      COACHING CUE

          As you review your trading, make a special study of how you exit trades. Do you
          tend to exit too early, so that you leave potential proﬁts on the table? Do you
          tend to overstay your welcome, so that potential proﬁts are retraced? Take it a
          step further: what could you have looked at to stay in the trade longer or to exit
          sooner? How can you best adjust your exits to the market’s level of volatility?
          If you reﬁne your exits, you can break your trading down into components and
          turn observations into goals for improvement.




          LESSON 87: THE POWER OF RESEARCH

          Rob Hanna is a trader and the writer of the Quantifiable Edges blog
          (www.quantifiableedges.blogspot.com), a unique site that tracks historical
          patterns in the stock market. His electronic newsletter goes out daily, de-
          tailing the trades he places from his research. For traders, the blog and
          newsletter are unique tools that can extend their market edge. I particu-
          larly find historical patterns relevant to discretionary trading, as we’ll see
          in Chapter 10. With a sound understanding of historical performance, we
          are in a great position to identify markets that are following their usual pat-
          terns and those that are not. Both scenarios can generate excellent trade
          ideas.
               Jeff Miller is a money manager in Naperville, Illinois, who also shares
          his ideas about markets and trading through his blog, A Dash of Insight
          (http://oldprof.typepad.com). He frequently challenges accepted trading
          wisdom and offers perspectives on markets that reflect his disciplined anal-
          ysis and understanding of economics. He has researched trading systems
          and uses those systems in his portfolio management. Like Rob, Jeff’s edge
          is that he tests ideas before he trades them, giving him confidence in risking
          his capital.
               Rob’s answer to my question of what he’s found most helpful to
          his self-mentoring as a trader was quite simple: “Research, research, and
