P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          210                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          they may lead to the same ultimate returns. Stated otherwise, good risk-
          adjusted returns are better for the psyche than extreme patterns of returns.
          It’s not how much you make, but how much you make per unit of risk
          taken that will keep you in or out of the performance zone.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to track the variability of your re-
          turns as intensively as your overall profitability. By variability of returns,
          I mean the absolute value of daily/weekly changes in your portfolio value:
          how much your account swings up or down on average each day. As mar-
          kets change in their volatility and as you shift in your level of conviction
          about trades, you’ll see changes in this variability. This tracking will tell
          you when you run more and less risk. On the whole, you’ll want greater
          variability when you trade well and have many solid ideas; you’ll want to
          cut your risk (lower the variability of returns) when you don’t see markets
          well and when good trading ideas and moves are scarce.

              Track the volatility of your returns, not just their direction. Volatil-
              ity affects trading psychology every bit as much as winning and
              losing.

               When you track the variability of returns, you’ll also be able to see
          when your swings in profit/loss are outliers from your historical norms.
          This will be an excellent alert that your levels of risk may be sufficient to
          generate those large emotional swings that will produce unwanted con-
          ditioned responses. Traders tend to love volatility when they’re making
          money and hate volatility when they’re losing. Psychologically, it makes
          sense to keep the volatility of your returns within bounds: markets may
          possess fat tails, but with prudent position sizing, your returns can remain
          stable. You don’t want markets conditioning your learning: you want to be
          your own coach, directing your own learning.


                      COACHING CUE

          The psychological research on trauma suggests that processing a very stressful
          event verbally—out loud or in writing—can be extremely helpful in making sense
          of that event and divesting it of enduring emotional impact. When we repeat
          something again and again, it becomes familiar to us and no longer evokes
          powerful emotion. If you encounter outsized gains or losses in your portfolio,
          double down in your use of the trading journal or in your conversations with
          peer traders to thoroughly process what happened and why. As noted above,
          this process is just as important following large gains as following large losses.
          When highly emotional events bypass explicit processing, that is when we are
          most vulnerable to the eﬀects of conditioning.
