P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                            191

          process is not positive thinking; it is delusional. It also reinforces unrealis-
          tic expectations, setting traders up for disappointment.
               Rather, positive thinking is thinking that leads to constructive re-
          sponses to challenging situations. For instance, a trader may make a rookie
          error and might chide himself for the mistake, using the incident to firm up
          his execution and attention to detail. This is very positive. A trader might
          also simply tell himself, “You’re really not trading well; you can do better
          than this.” That might be an accurate assessment and a prod toward greater
          motivation.


              Positive thinking is not necessarily optimistic thinking; it is con-
              structive thought.

               How do you know the schemas and thinking patterns that are best for
          you and your trading? Fortunately, we can create a customized cognitive
          journal precisely for this purpose. Recall that in the traditional journal, the
          first column describes specific incidents of problematic trading; the sec-
          ond column summarizes the self-talk associated with the incidents; and
          the third column lays out the consequences of the self-talk. To create a
          format to track positive thinking, we use the journal to highlight episodes
          of positive trading. The first column describes what was happening in the
          markets at the time of the exemplary trading. The second column features
          the self-talk that occurred before and during these incidents; the third col-
          umn identifies how the self-talk contributed to good trading practice. In
          other words, you use the journal to highlight what you’re doing when
          you’re trading at your best.
               Observe that this doesn’t mean that you only focus on your profitable
          trades, though many of your positive journal entries will be profitable oc-
          casions. Rather, you want to focus on all occasions when you traded well,
          even if you took normal losses. For instance, if you took a trade with very
          favorable risk/reward but were stopped out at your preset level and later
          reentered the idea for a gain, which would be a very positive episode of
          trading. The role of the journal is to isolate the thought processes that en-
          abled you to keep your losses small and your trading flexible.


              The cognitive journal can be used to identify the best practices in
              our thinking and trading.


               One example of such a positive-oriented journal appears below. Once
          again, we are keeping the journal entries detailed so that we can crystal-
          lize in our minds the kinds of self-talk that are associated with our best
