P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          120                                                      THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          successful episodes of trading in which you followed the rule. Make the
          rule more than a guideline; it should represent a belief and conviction. The
          best rules feel like must, not just should.
              Your assignment is to take a thorough trading inventory of your trading
          rules. How many do you really have, and how explicit are they? Do you just
          remind yourself of them passively, or do you rehearse them with belief and
          conviction? If you’re like most traders, you’ll find that you have many loose
          guidelines, but few firm rules. That means that you haven’t really drilled
          down to identify the patterns behind your best and worst trading, which
          really form the backbone of all good rules.

              Rules should reflect best practices in trading.

              Remember: you can’t follow a discipline that you never formulated
          in the first place. The clearer the rules and the more you feel them, the
          stronger they will serve as brakes to your impulses and guides to your best
          behavior. Rules are not straightjackets; they free you up to be your best.
          Think of professions in which consistency is a virtue: airline pilots land-
          ing an aircraft, surgeons making incisions, racecar drivers maneuvering in
          a pack. The best performers are rule governed: they are keenly aware of
          the dangers of ignoring the rules of their profession. It is in the internaliza-
          tion of their rules that they achieve flawless execution. That is your goal in
          coaching yourself: to make rules so routine that they make extraordinary
          performance the norm.

                      COACHING CUE

          Rule-following is a great basis for self-evaluation. Creating checklist report
          cards to track your rule governance helps ground you day to day in best prac-
          tices. Among the rules you should consider formulating and tracking for self-
          assessment are:
            r Rules for position sizing.
            r Rules for limiting losses, per trade, per day, per week, etc.
            r Rules for adding to existing positions.
            r Rules for when you stop trading or limit your size/risk.
            r Rules for increasing your size/risk, per trade, per day, etc.
            r Rules for entering and exiting positions.
            r Rules for preparing for the trading day/week.
            r Rules for diversiﬁcation among positions.
               Not all these rules will apply to all traders; the key is to focus on the rules
          that capture your best trading and turn those into report cards for daily/weekly
          self-assessment and goal setting.
