P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          182                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          yourself, then you know that your automatic thinking is distorted in a neg-
          ative way. Surely you deserve to talk to yourself the way you would talk
          with others in a similar situation!

              Many times it’s the tone of our self-talk, not just its content, that
              disrupts our trading.

              When you conduct this guided imagery exercise day after day, partic-
          ularly after you’ve interrupted some of your negative thoughts, you grad-
          ually learn to talk with yourself in more positive ways. In one variation of
          the exercise, I have traders imagine that they are the other trader they are
          talking to, so that they literally are practicing talking to themselves in ways
          that they would support someone else they cared about. During these ex-
          ercises, traders who have been the most volatile and angry can access a
          wealth of caring, supportive messages as they view themselves as people
          they truly care about.
              You are your own trading coach. Do you want your coach to berate
          you, to focus on your every mistake, to threaten you with dire conse-
          quences? Or do you want your coach to bring out the best in you? When you
          cast your thoughts as dialogues, you have a chance to reframe the mental
          maps that guide your thinking, feeling, and acting. Inevitably, we do talk to
          ourselves. We are coaching ourselves. The only question is whether we do
          so consciously and constructively or automatically and destructively.

                     COACHING CUE

          If you have a mentor or peer trader who you are working with, pay particular
          attention to how they talk to you when you are having problems. Many times we
          can internalize the voices of others in reframing our automatic thought patterns.
          “What would my mentor say to me?” or “What would a good coach say to me?”
          is an excellent start toward constructive reframing.




          LESSON 57: USE INTENSIVE GUIDED
          IMAGERY TO CHANGE THOUGHT
          PATTERNS

          The value of imagery is that it stands in for actual experience, with an un-
          usual power to access emotional responses. Here is an effective cognitive
          exercise that makes active use of the emotional power of imagery.
              The first step in the exercise, as emphasized in recent lessons, is to
          identify the repetitive, automatic thoughts that are disrupting your trading.
