P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          42                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          the potential reversal of a winning trade into a threat. If all the market
          can do after the run-up is chop around in a flat way, perhaps this is an
          opportunity to add to the position, I reasoned. I calibrated my risk/reward
          on the added piece to the position (and for the position overall, given my
          new average purchase price) and added a small portion to the trade. The
          added increment wasn’t large enough to dramatically affect the profitability
          or risk of the trade, but it was an important psychological step: I turned a
          perceived threat into opportunity.
               The key here is to distinguish between actual threats—markets that
          truly are not behaving according to your expectations—from perceived
          threat. That requires reflection about markets and about personal assump-
          tions. Once I saw that the trade was proceeding normally, I was free to
          challenge the filters that were leading me to become nervous with a good
          trade.


               When you think about your thinking by adopting the perspective of
               a self-observer, you no longer buy into negative thought patterns.


              After you identify a perception that turns a normal event into a threat,
          the next challenge is to find opportunity in that normal event. I might feel
          threatened by a difference of opinion with my wife, but that threat can be
          turned into an opportunity for fruitful communication and problem solving.
          We might feel threatened by a trade that starts modestly profitable but then
          stops us out, but that threat can be turned into an opportunity to flip our
          position or reassess our views of that market.
              Identify the perceived threat; turn the perceived threat into an op-
          portunity: that is a two-step process that addresses the true cause of
          emotional reactions that distort trading decisions. By keeping a journal
          specifically devoted to your thinking and perceiving, you can structure this
          two-step process and turn it into a habit pattern that you activate in real
          time.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you talk or IM about the day’s trading, pay attention to how you describe
          the markets: good, bad, quiet, active. Listen especially for the tone of your
          descriptions. Many times, your tone and language will give away whether you’re
          in tune with markets or ﬁghting them. If you become caught up in what you
          think the market should be doing, you’re most likely to ﬁght it when it does
          something else.
