P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                      73


               You will know you’re pursuing your happiness when you are so
          involved in what you’re doing that you don’t want it to be limited to
          business hours. When you’re in love with the right person, that love per-
          vades all your activities, not just those in the nightclub or bedroom. When
          you find deep fulfillment in markets, you live and breathe markets, not just
          when they can pay you out. A useful self-assessment exercise to carry out
          during the coming week is to log your hours spent on trading outside of for-
          mal market hours and how you feel during those times. Do you get bursts
          of joy when you find new patterns and ideas? Do you generate a deep sense
          of mastery and pride when you work on yourself and improve your craft?
          Do your ongoing efforts at figuring out markets and enhancing your perfor-
          mance bring a sense of pride and satisfaction?
               If you’re not spending as much time on trading outside formal market
          hours as during them, trading is probably not your calling. Can you imagine
          a priest who spent time on his religion only from nine to five? An artist who
          only painted when art shows were active? When trading is truly a part of
          you, contributing to your happiness, you’re most likely to be immersed in
          the activities that build skills and yield pattern recognition. So much of
          trading success is finding the niche that sustains such immersion. Trading
          can be a great job and a potentially lucrative career, but only if it’s also a
          calling.


                      COACHING CUE

          Many traders confuse contentment and fulﬁllment with laziness and smug self-
          satisfaction. Out of a fear of becoming complacent, they resist the experience
          of contentment. As a result, traders are often not content with their progress
          and fall prey to frustration—and the eﬀects of frustration on trading. You can be
          content with your progress to date and still be motivated to move forward. The
          key is setting shorter and longer-term goals, so that you can bask in satisfaction
          when you reach an immediate objective, but still stay hungry for the larger
          objectives.




          LESSON 23: GET INTO THE ZONE

          Most experienced traders know the feeling of being in the zone: seeing
          markets so clearly that the right decisions seem to be effortless. The psy-
          chologist Abraham Maslow referred to these occasions as peak experi-
          ences; researcher Mihalyi Csikszenmihalyi refers to them as periods of
          flow. The hallmark of being in the zone is that the performer feels at
