P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      133


               To use an example from The Psychology of Trading, I grew up in a very
          close family. My parents were both estranged from their parents and vowed
          to create a very different family environment for their children. They were
          so successful in that regard that I sometimes felt that the environment was
          too close. I sought privacy, taking long bicycle rides, walks, and even show-
          ers. Later, when I met my wife Margie and became part of a household with
          her three children, I found myself taking long showers and withdrawing
          from family life. This disrupted morning routines and led to a bit of tension
          in the household.
               For years I had lived alone and had never experienced the feeling of be-
          ing too close to others. When I entered a new family situation, the old feel-
          ings from my formative experiences came back to me and I coped rigidly
          in my old way: by withdrawing and seeking privacy. What worked in child-
          hood, however, failed dismally in the new family. By reenacting old de-
          fenses in new situations, I created a fresh set of problems.
               All of these defenses tend to happen automatically, outside of con-
          scious awareness. Without some way of making these repetitive patterns
          conscious, we cannot change them. One goal of psychodynamic work is to
          make the unconscious conscious: to make us self-aware, so that we can
          find new endings to old conflicts. I was able to change my patterns within
          the family once I recognized that I no longer needed to cope in ways from
          my past: my present family wasn’t my former one, and I was no longer
          a child.

              The first goal of psychodynamic work is insight: recognition
              and understanding of one’s patterns and awareness of their
              limitations. The key insight is simply: You had a reason for doing
              this in the past; you don’t have to do it any more.

              So how does this relate to trading? The risk and uncertainty of
          trading—the gains and losses, victories and defeats—have an uncanny
          way of triggering feelings from our past. A classic example is the trader
          who felt as though he never measured up to his parents’ standards and
          expectations. He brings his sense of inferiority to the markets, taking im-
          prudent risks to prove that he truly is a success. Of course, no amount of
          winning in markets can fill the emotional void, leading him to take ever-
          greater risks, until he finally blows up—and confirms his worst fears. In
          such a situation, no tweaking of trading methods will solve the trader’s
          problem. Until he resolves the conflict at the heart of his dilemma, he will
          continually find himself acting out his personal dramas in his trading.

              Many trading problems are the result of acting out personal
              dramas in markets.
