P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          280                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Jason Goepfert is the editor of the Sentimentrader site (www.senti-
          mentrader.com), which—as its name suggests—focuses on measures of
          market sentiment. Jason freely offers his perspectives on markets and also
          shares the results of his tests of historical market patterns. He collects a
          large amount of data on markets and assembles the data in unique ways to
          uncover possible edges. These data provide information to guide traders’
          thinking, as well as food for specific trade ideas. A particularly interest-
          ing facet of his service is the tracking of relative smart and dumb money,
          including unique ways of reading options sentiment.
               In response to my question of what has most helped his self-mentoring,
          Charles Kirk provided a single, detailed response: his BOO book. BOO
          stands for Book of Observations, and it is a collection of his trading expe-
          rience. “In this book,” he explains, “I keep a detailed track record for every
          trade I’ve made, along with observations about the market and things I’ve
          learned from others and from monitoring my own success and failures ...
          My BOO book contains specific and detailed information on every strategy
          and screen(s) I use, along with detailed performance information over dif-
          ferent periods of time. In essence, everything I’ve learned up until now can
          be found in this book.” Significantly, the contents of the book are organized
          in a database called do-Organizer (www.gemx.com), which enables him to
          readily access any idea that he’s written about.


              A database turns a trading journal into an active research tool.


               Charles indicates that the database keeps his thoughts organized, as
          a scientist might systematically record data and observations from labora-
          tory investigations. “Treating the market, and a strategy, from a scientific,
          evidence-based approach in this manner was helpful to me to keep me fo-
          cused, disciplined, and on the right track,” he explains. “This also helped
          me to test new strategies and to recognize early when certain strategies
          stopped working in specific market conditions, so I could adjust and tran-
          sition my trading as needed.” He also uses the BOO book to track new
          strategy ideas that he wants to integrate into his own trading. “I consider
          myself a perpetual student of the market and maintaining and using my
          BOO book has been incredibly helpful in this regard,” he notes.
               Indeed, Charles explains, “Looking back, the biggest mistake of my
          trading career was not starting my BOO book sooner. It took me several
          years to understand the importance of keeping notes in an organized man-
          ner while using a scientific, evidence-based approach to test and improve
          my skills and strategies.”
               The BOO book is a great example of the creative strategies that
          successful traders utilize to identify and hone their strengths. I believe
