P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               257


                      COACHING CUE

          It is particularly promising to ﬁnd themes that result from a particular news
          catalyst. For instance, if a report on the economy is stronger than expected and
          you see sustained buying, track the sectors and stocks leading the move early
          on and consider trading them for a trending move, especially if they hold up well
          on market pullbacks. Many of those themes can run for several days, setting up
          great swing moves.




          LESSON 80: MANAGE THE TRADE

          Business success isn’t just about the products and services a firm offers
          to the public. Much of success can be traced to the management of the
          business. If you don’t hire the right people, supervise them properly, track
          inventories, and stick to a budget, you’ll fail to make money with even the
          best products and services.
               So it is with trading. The best traders I’ve known are quite skilled at
          managing trades. By trade management, I mean something different from
          generating the trade idea and executing it. Rather, I’m referring to what you
          do with the position after you’ve entered it and before you’ve exited.
               Your first reaction might be: You don’t do anything! It’s certainly pos-
          sible to enter a position and sit in it, waiting for it to hit your profit target
          or your stoploss level. That reaction, however, is inefficient. It’s like sell-
          ing the same mix of products at all stores even though some products sell
          better and some sell worse at particular locations.
               To appreciate why this is the case, consider the moment you enter
          a trade. At that point you have a minimum of information regarding the
          soundness of your idea. As the market trades following your entry, you
          accumulate fresh data about your idea: the action is either supporting or
          not supporting your reasons for being in the market. For instance, if your
          idea is predicated on falling interest rates and you see bonds break out
          of a price range, that would be supportive of your trade. If you anticipate
          an upside breakout in stocks and you see volume expand and the NYSE
          TICK move to new highs for the day on an upward move, that is similarly
          supportive. If you track market action and themes while the trade is on,
          you can update the odds of your trade being successful.


              Trade management is the set of decisions you make based on the
              fresh information that accumulates during the trade.
