P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 5



                              Breaking Old
                                Patterns
                          Psychodynamic Frameworks
                               for Self-Coaching



                     The strangest and most fantastic fact about negative
                     emotions is that people actually worship them.
                                                       —P.D. Ouspensky




                 o this point, we’ve been exploring processes that are common to all

         T       change efforts and all performance coaching. Now we begin a look at
                 individual frameworks for coaching, beginning with psychodynamic
          modalities. These frameworks are approaches that emphasize the con-
          tinuity of past and present—how old patterns replay themselves in the
          present—and the ways in which current relationships can remake patterns
          born of prior, negative relationship experiences.
               The psychodynamic framework is more commonly connected to long-
          term psychoanalysis than to coaching, but I’ve found tremendous value in
          utilizing the medium of relationship experiences to help traders with their
          performance. This chapter will explain how psychodynamics are related
          to trading and how the dynamic framework can inform your own efforts at
          self-coaching.
               I personally draw most upon dynamic modalities when I’m working
          on trading problems that are part of larger life challenges—particularly
          when those challenges have been part of our life histories prior to
          trading. Many issues that impact trading—concerns over success/failure,
          self-confidence/self-doubt, security/insecurity—predate our trading ef-
          forts, but play themselves out in how we make financial decisions.
               The best way to describe psychodynamics is as a way of thinking, as
          well as a set of tools, to help ensure that people’s pasts don’t become their
          futures. And, in the context of this book, it all starts with a single insight:

                                                                                       131
