P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          250                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               In that aggressive scenario, Trader B would ramp the variability of
          daily returns to 5 percent. Average daily swings of that magnitude, par-
          ticularly during a slump, are bound to affect the trader’s psyche. Once the
          trader becomes rattled, that small positive edge can turn into a small neg-
          ative one. Amplified by leverage, the trader could easily blow up and lose
          everything, all the while possessing sound trading methods.
               The size of your edge and the variability of your daily returns (which
          is a function of position sizing) will determine the path of your P/L curve.
          Management of that path is crucial to emotional self-management. Your
          assignment is to utilize Henry’s forecaster in the manner illustrated above,
          using your historical information regarding your edge and average win size
          to generate likely paths of your returns. Then play with the average win
          size to find the level of risk, reward, and drawdown that makes trading
          worth your while financially, but that doesn’t overwhelm you with swings
          in your portfolio.
               Few traders truly understand the implications of their trading size,
          given their degree of edge. If you know what you’re likely to make and lose
          in your trading business, you’ll be best able to cope with the lean times and
          not become overconfident when things are good. Match your level of port-
          folio risk to your level of personal risk tolerance for a huge step toward
          trading success.


                      COACHING CUE

          Doubling your position sizing will have the same eﬀect on the path of your re-
          turns as keeping a constant trading size when market volatility doubles. This
          process is a dilemma for traders who hold positions over many days and weeks,
          but is also a challenge for day traders, who experience diﬀerent patterns of
          volatility at diﬀerent parts of the trading day. It is common for traders to iden-
          tify volatility with opportunity and even raise their trading size/risk as markets
          become more volatile. This greatly ampliﬁes the swings of a trading account,
          and it plays havoc with traders’ emotions. Adjusting your risk for the volatility
          of the market is a good way to control your bet size so that a few losses won’t
          wipe out the proﬁts from many days and weeks.




          LESSON 78: THE IMPORTANCE
          OF EXECUTION IN TRADING

          You can have the greatest ideas in the business world, but if they’re not
          executed properly, they won’t be worth much. A great product marketed
