P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          12                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          new facets of ourselves. As we’ll see shortly, discrepancy is the mother of
          all change: when we are in the same environments, we tend to draw upon
          the same, routine modes of thought and behavior.
               A few months ago I had an attack of acute appendicitis while stay-
          ing in a LaGuardia airport hotel awaiting a return flight to Chicago. When
          I went to the nearest emergency room at Elmhurst Hospital outside
          Jackson Heights, Queens, I found that I was seemingly the only native
          English speaker in a sea of people awaiting medical care. After some dif-
          ficulty attracting attention, I was admitted to the hospital and spent the
          next several days of recuperation navigating my way through patients and
          staff of every conceivable nationality. By the end of the experience, I felt at
          home there. I’ve since stayed at the same airport hotel and routinely make
          visits into the surrounding neighborhoods—areas I would have never in my
          wildest dreams ventured into previously. In adapting to that environment,
          I discovered hidden strengths. I also overcame more than a few hidden
          prejudices and fears.
               The greatest enemy of change is routine. When we lapse into routine
          and operate on autopilot, we are no longer fully and actively conscious of
          what we’re doing and why. That is why some of the most fertile situations
          for personal growth—those that occur within new environments—are
          those that force us to exit our routines and actively master unfamiliar
          challenges.

               In familiar environments and routines, we operate on autopilot.
               Nothing changes.

               When you act as your own trading coach, your challenge is
          to stay fully conscious, alert to risk and opportunity. One of your
          greatest threats will be the autopilot mode in which you act without think-
          ing, without full awareness of your situation. If you shift your trading
          environment, you push yourself to adapt to new situations: you break
          routines. If your environment is always the same, you will find yourself
          gravitating to the same thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. We are mired in
          repetitive patterns of thought and behavior because we are mired in rou-
          tines: the same emotional and physical environments. Indeed, we repeat
          the same patterns—for better or for worse—precisely because those pat-
          terns are adaptations to our current settings.
               So how can we change our trading environments? The key is recogniz-
          ing that our physical settings are only a part of our surroundings. Here are
          a few routine-busting activities that can alert us to risks and possibilities:
           1. Seek Out Divergent Views. Conversations with traders who trade
               differently from you—different time frames, markets, or styles—can
               often help cement your views or question them. Similarly, reading
