P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                  95


          LESSON 30: COPING—TURN STRESS
          INTO WELL-BEING

          We have seen that stress does not need to become distress if it is balanced
          with generous amounts of well-being. People can endure high levels of
          challenge, pressure, and uncertainty if their work is meaningful to them
          and they experience rewards tied to their efforts.
               We can think of coping as a set of strategies for handling stressful sit-
          uations so that they don’t become distressful. By coping effectively with
          the risks and uncertainties of markets and the demands of the learning
          curve, traders can go a long way toward maintaining a favorable emotional
          balance.
               Psychological research tells us that there is no single most effective
          coping strategy. Rather, people with different personalities and needs em-
          ploy different coping patterns to best handle situations. When you are your
          own trading coach, it is important to know how you cope best with trading
          stresses, so that you can activate these strategies on demand.
               This knowledge is especially crucial because, at times of greatest
          stress, we often lapse into old, well-worn coping patterns that may have
          worked at one time, but may not be appropriate to the current situation.
          An avoidant coping pattern may have worked in past work situations in-
          volving interpersonal conflict, but would be disastrous if employed in the
          middle of a losing trade in a fast-moving market. Doing what comes natu-
          rally is not necessarily the best strategy for handling stress. As we will see
          in Chapter 5, those past, overlearned modes of coping are often what keep
          us locked into cyclical problem patterns.
               One example that I commonly encounter involves traders who utilize
          highly confrontive coping strategies. Many traders have aggressive person-
          alities and succeed by facing challenges head on. This can work quite well
          in situations where one must negotiate a business deal or handle a piece
          of bad news. In the markets, however, the aggressive response is not al-
          ways the best one. When facing a series of losing trades—something that
          happens to all of us—traders can become more aggressive and confront
          the situation by trading more and larger. This way of handling frustration
          leads a trader to take maximum risk when he is seeing the market least
          clearly—a virtual formula for catastrophic drawdowns.

              You can often recognize failed coping strategies when you look
              back on your actions and wonder what could possibly have led
              you to behave that way.

              So how can you know which coping strategies work best for you in
          particular situations? Below is a checklist that will help you sort out your
