P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          309

          market. If I include many bull and bear markets in my database, I will go
          back so far in time that I will be studying periods that are radically different
          from the current one in terms of who and what are moving markets. Auto-
          mated, algorithmic strategies have completely reshaped market patterns,
          particularly over short time periods. If you study precomputer-era markets
          you would miss this influence altogether. Select a look-back period for his-
          torical analysis that is long enough to cover different markets but not so
          lengthy as to leave us with irrelevant data is as much art as science.
               My approach to trading treats historical market patterns as qual-
          itative research data. In a nutshell, qualitative research is hypothesis-
          generating research, not hypothesis-testing research. I view the patterns
          of markets as sources of trading hypotheses, not as fixed conclusions. The
          basic hypothesis is that the next trading period will not differ significantly
          from the recent past ones. If a pattern has existed over the past X periods,
          we can hypothesize that it will persist over the next period. Like any hy-
          pothesis, this is a testable proposition. It is an idea backed by support, not
          just faith or superstition, but it is not accepted as a fixed truth to be traded
          blindly.


              Historical testing yields hypotheses for trading, not conclusions.


               For this reason, I do not emphasize the use of inferential statistics in
          the investigation of historical patterns. I am looking for qualitative differ-
          ences much as a psychologist might look for various behavior patterns in a
          person seeking therapy. In short, I’m looking to generate a hypothesis, not
          test one. The testing, in the trading context, is reflected in my trading re-
          sults: if my returns significantly exceed those expected by chance, we can
          conclude that I am trading knowledge, not randomness.
               When we adopt a qualitative perspective, the issue of look-back period
          becomes less thorny. As long as we consider the results of historical in-
          vestigations to be nothing more than hypotheses, we can draw our ideas
          from the past few weeks, months, years, or decades of trading. The basic
          hypothesis remains the same: that the next time period will not differ sig-
          nificantly from the most recent ones. With that in mind, we can frame mul-
          tiple hypotheses derived from different patterns over different time frames.
          One hypothesis, for example, might predicate buying the market based on
          strong action at the close of the prior day, with the anticipation of tak-
          ing out the previous day’s R1 pivot level. A second hypothesis might also
          entail buying the market based on a pattern of weakness during the previ-
          ous week’s trading. When multiple independent patterns point in the same
          direction, we still don’t have a certain conclusion, but we do have a firm
          hypothesis.
