P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          320                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          each other in graphical form, it is easier to accomplish that brainstorming.
          You won’t arrive at hard and fast conclusions, but you’ll be on your way
          toward generating promising trading ideas.


                     COACHING CUE

          Plot charts of the S&P 500 Index (SPY) against the major sector ETFs from the
          S&P 500 universe as a great way to observe leading and lagging sectors, as well
          as divergences at market highs and lows. The sectors I follow most closely are:
          XLB (Materials); XLI (Industrials); XLY (Consumer Discretionary); XLP (Consumer
          Staples); XLE (Energy); XLF (Financial); XLV (Health Care); and XLK (Technology).
          If you want to bypass such charting, you can view excellent sector-related indi-
          cators and charts at the Decision Point site (www.decisionpoint.com). Another
          excellent site for stock and sector charts is Barchart (www.barchart.com).




          LESSON 95: CREATE YOUR
          INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT
          VARIABLES

          When I organize my spreadsheets, I generally place my raw data furthest
          to the left (columns A, B, C, etc.); transformations of the raw data into
          independent variables in the middle; and dependent variables furthest to
          the right. Let’s take a look at what this means.
              Your independent variables are what we might call candidate
          predictors. They are variables that we think have an effect on the markets
          we’re trading. For example, let’s say that we’re investigating the impact of
          price change over the previous day of trading (independent variable) on the
          next day’s return for the S&P 500 Index (dependent variable). The raw data
          would consist of price data for the S&P 500 Index over the look-back period
          that we select. The independent variable would be a moving calculation of
          the prior day’s return. The dependent variable would be a calculation of the
          return over the next day. The independent variable is what we think might
          give us a trading edge; the dependent variable is what we would be trading
          to exploit that edge.

              If I keep my raw data to the left in the spreadsheet, followed by
              transformations of the raw data to form the independent variable,
              and then followed by the dependent variable, I keep analyses clear
              from spreadsheet to spreadsheet.
