P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          138                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your trading, causing you to overtrade, stand aside during times of opportu-
          nity, etc. At these times, you’re making trading decisions, not to manage
          your capital, but to manage the distress from those core conflicts. Our
          worst trading occurs when we’re managing our feelings rather than our
          positions.
               Your assignment is to draw upon your sine wave charts from the pre-
          vious lesson to map your trading problems as sequences of needs, feel-
          ings, coping/defenses, and consequences. You should be able to draw an
          accurate flow chart that shows how feelings associated with frustrated
          needs lead you to take actions that bring present-day problems. This chart
          will capture the focus of your psychodynamic self-coaching efforts. By
          breaking this pattern and inserting new elements, we can become more
          intentional in our trading, more self-determined in our results.


                      COACHING CUE

          Most traders, I ﬁnd, don’t require long-term therapy. If traders are signiﬁcantly
          troubled, they cannot sustain a trading career. Rather, they cope and function
          well, but periodically lapse into old patterns that interfere with their eﬀective-
          ness. Many times, traders can identify their patterns by identifying their most
          frequent and costly departures from their trading plans and then noting the
          feelings and situations that accompanied these departures. By noting feelings
          from recent trading problems and then observing when you’ve felt those feel-
          ings in other areas of life, you can crystallize patterns that are most likely to
          impact future trading.




          LESSON 43: CHALLENGE
          OUR DEFENSES

          A cardinal idea within psychodynamic work is that the problems that mo-
          tivate people to make change efforts are rarely the core conflicts that they
          are repeating across situations. Rather, it’s their defending against the pain
          of those conflicts that brings the unfortunate consequences and the recog-
          nition of the need for change. Our problems, from this vantage point, are
          the result of our rigid, outmoded coping. What worked for us at one time
          of life now works against us.
               A good example from the markets is “revenge trading.” This occurs
          when we trade more aggressively following losses in an attempt to get our
          money back all at once. Pain and frustration from a loss lead to an angry
          defensive response, an effort to get rid of the hurt. At that point, the trading
