P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          330                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Let’s retrieve the Practice Sheet historical daily data for the S&P 500 In-
          dex that we used in our previous lessons. To refresh memory: Column A in
          our spreadsheet consists of the Date; columns B through E are open-high-
          low-close data. Column F is the independent variable, the current day’s
          price change; entered into cell F22, it would be: “=((F22-F21)/F21)* 100.”
          Column G will serve as our contextual variable. In G22, we enter the
          following:

                                = if(E22>average(E3:E21),1,0)

               This will return to cell G23 a “1” if the current price is above the prior
          day’s simple 20-day moving average for the S&P 500 Index; a “0” if it is not
          above the average. The data label for cell G1 might be MA. Our dependent
          measure will be the next day’s price change. In cell H22, this would be
          “=((E23-E22)/E22)* 100” and H1 would have the label SP+1.
               To complete the sheet, we would highlight cell G22 and H22; click the
          Excel menu item for Edit; click Copy; highlight the cells below G23 for
          the full length of the data set; and hit Enter. We highlight and copy all the
          data in the sheet as before; save the sheet as Practice Sheet2; and instruct
          Windows to save the data to the clipboard for another application. We open
          a fresh spreadsheet; click on cell A1; click the Excel menu item for Edit;
          select Paste; and our sheet now fills with text data. Note that, in this case,
          we’ll have to eliminate rows 2 to 21, since they don’t have a value for the 20-
          day moving average. We’ll also eliminate the last row of data, because there
          are no data for the next day. You eliminate a row simply by highlighting
          the letter(s) for the row(s) at left; clicking the Excel menu item for Edit;
          selecting Delete. The row will disappear and the remaining data below will
          move into place.

              Note that using a moving average as a variable of interest reduces
              the size of your data set, since the initial values will not have a mov-
              ing average calculated. You need to take this into account when
              determining your desired sample size.

               We now double sort the data to perform the contextual investigation.
          Let’s say that we’re interested in the expectations following a rising day
          in a market that is trading above versus below its 20-day moving average.
          We sort the data based on column F “SP(1)” as we did in our previous
          lesson, performing the sort on a Descending basis, so that the largest and
          positive price changes appear at the top of the sheet. Now we select only
          the data for the cells that show positive price change and copy those to
          another sheet. Our second sort will be based on column G (MA), again
          on a Descending Basis. This will separate the up days in markets trading
          above their 20-day moving average (those coded “1”) from all other days.
