P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         327

          markets are more likely to reverse direction. Later, you can limit your sorting
          to the declining days and sort them by very weak and less weak markets. Many
          times, the patterns you see among the rising days are diﬀerent from those that
          show up among the falling days.




          LESSON 97: CODE THE DATA

          Sometimes the independent variable you’re interested in is a categori-
          cal variable, not a set of continuous values. If I wanted to investigate
          the relationship between a person’s weight (independent variable) and
          their lung capacity (dependent variable), all of my data would be contin-
          uous. If, however, I wanted to investigate the relationship between gender
          (male/female) and lung capacity, I would now be looking at a categorical
          variable in relationship to a continuous one. Conversely, if I wanted to sim-
          ply identify whether a person had normal versus subnormal lung capacity,
          I would wind up with a categorical breakdown for my dependent variable.
               There are times in market analysis when we want to look at the
          data categorically, rather than in a continuous fashion. In my own in-
          vestigations, I routinely combine categorical views with continuous ones.
          Here’s why:
               If you reopen the spreadsheet we created, Practice Sheet, that exam-
          ined current day returns in the S&P 500 Index as a function of the previous
          day’s performance, you’ll see that we had Date data in column A; open-high-
          low-close data in columns B–E; the present day’s price change in column
          F; and the next day’s price change in column G. For the analysis in the last
          lesson, we sorted the data based upon the present day’s price change and
          then examined the average price change for the next day as a function of
          strong versus weak days. Our dependent measure, next day’s price change,
          was continuous, and we compared average values to get a sense for the
          relationship between the independent and dependent variables.
               Averages, however, can be misleading: a few extreme values can skew
          the result. These outliers can make the differences between two sets of av-
          erages look much larger than they really are. We can eliminate this possi-
          ble source of bias by changing our dependent variable. We’ll keep the next
          day’s price change in column G, but now will add a dummy-coded variable
          in column H. This code will simply tell us whether the price change in col-
          umn G is up or down. Thus, in cell H2, I would type in (without quotation
          marks): “=if(G2>0,1,0)” and hit Enter. This instructs the cell at H2 to re-
          turn a “1” if the price change in cell G2 is positive; anything else—a zero or
          negative return—will return a “0.” I will then click on H2; click the Excel
          menu item for Edit; click Copy; click cell H3 and drag all the way down the
