P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          4                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 1: DRAW ON EMOTION
          TO BECOME A CHANGE AGENT

          For some of us, the status quo is not enough. We experience glimpses into
          the person we’re capable of being; we yearn to be more than we are in life’s
          mundane moments.
               That yearning starts with the notion of change. We desire changes in
          our lives. We adapt—we grow—by making the right kinds of changes. All
          too often, however, we feel stuck. We’re doing the same things, making the
          same mistakes again and again. Do we wait for life to change us, or do we
          become agents of our own life changes?
               The easy part is initiating a change process. The real challenge is sus-
          taining change. How many times does an alcoholic take the initial steps
          toward sobriety, only to relapse? How often do we start diets and exercise
          programs, only to return to our slothful ways? If we focus on starting a
          change process, we leave ourselves unprepared for the next crucial steps:
          keeping the flame of change burning bright.
               The flaw with most popular writings and practices in psychology and
          coaching is that they are designed to initiate change. These writings and
          practices leave people feeling good—until it becomes apparent that differ-
          ent efforts are needed to sustain change. Successful coaching doesn’t just
          catalyze change: it turns change efforts into habit patterns that become sec-
          ond nature. The key to successful coaching is turning change into routine;
          making new behaviors become second nature.
               That’s where emotion comes in.
               For years I had attempted—unsuccessfully—to sustain a weight loss
          program. Then, in the year 2000, I was diagnosed with Type II diabetes.
          My diet had to change; I needed to lose weight. If I didn’t, I realized with
          crystal clarity, I could lose my health and let my wife and children down.
          Literally that same day I began a dietary regimen that continues to this day.
          My weight dropped 40 pounds (I shed the pounds so quickly that friends
          were concerned that I had a wasting illness) and I regained control of my
          blood sugar.
               What was the catalyst for the change? Years of telling myself to eat
          differently, exercise more, and lose weight produced absolutely no results.
          A single emotional experience of the necessity for change, however, made
          all the difference. I didn’t just think I needed to change: I knew it with every
          fiber of my being. I felt it.
               So it is with traders.
               Perhaps you’ve told yourself that you need to follow your rules, that
          you need to trade smaller, or that you should avoid trading during certain
          market conditions or times of day. Still you make the same mistakes, lose
