P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                             113


          performance slumps and also you can detect flaws even when you’re
          making money.
               To keep yourself solution-focused, you want to ask yourself, “What
          did I do well today? What about this trade did I do right?” You’ll find that,
          over time, your performance is varied. Not all trades are poorly conceived,
          poorly executed losers. If you lost less today than the past several days,
          what did you do better? If you had a number of winning trades during sev-
          eral losing days, what distinguished those winners? Focus on the improve-
          ments in your trading and then isolate the specific actions you took to gen-
          erate those improvements. These actions can be meaningful additions to a
          daily to-do list.

              “What did I do better this week than last week?” is a great starting
              point for guiding next week’s efforts. Do more of what works—it’s
              the essence of the solution focus.

               Another technique for sustaining the solution focus referenced at the
          end of the last lesson is to identify a mentor or trader you respect and
          ask yourself how he would be trading a particular idea. Sometimes it is
          very helpful to try out solution patterns that you borrow from others. Over
          time, you adapt these patterns to your own ways of thinking and trading,
          so that they become distinctly yours. For example, I’ve worked with quite
          a few hedge fund portfolio managers and have learned from them the im-
          portance of thinking thematically about markets: observing various sectors
          and asset classes and creating narratives that guide a longer-term perspec-
          tive. The specific themes I track and the time frames I monitor are com-
          pletely different from theirs, but there is a similarity of process. When I’m
          not trading well, I can model their processes and place myself more in line
          with market’s trends.
               Still another way to keep the solution focus is to make special note of
          mistakes that you don’t make in your trading. These notes represent excep-
          tions to problem patterns. If there’s a mistake you’ve made lately, it helps
          to hone in on occasions when you haven’t made the mistake. What are you
          doing differently at those times to avoid the mistake? Perhaps you’re an-
          ticipating the problem and consciously doing something different. Maybe
          you’re avoiding the mistake by following a particular rule or practice. What-
          ever helps you do less of the wrong things can also form the basis for
          solutions.

              Look to situations in which you don’t make your worst mistakes.
              Many times those situations hold the key to avoiding problem
              patterns more consistently.
