P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      23

          with them. If you can observe something about yourself, you immediately
          introduce an element of psychological distance. Even the most negative
          thoughts and feelings cannot trigger unwanted behaviors if you don’t iden-
          tify with them. Daily meditation is a powerful strategy for building your
          own Internal Observer and sustaining a change process.


          LESSON 8: CREATE SCRIPTS
          FOR LIFE CHANGE

          There is a bit of a chicken-and-egg challenge associated with making
          changes in our lives. To change a behavior pattern, you have to be able
          to exit that pattern. If, however, you had the ability to avoid enacting those
          patterns, you wouldn’t need to change in the first place.
               This dilemma is a common barrier for traders who would like to be
          their own trading coaches, but don’t know how to stand apart from the
          problem patterns that they repeat week after week, month after month.
               To appreciate how we can shift ourselves out of old, problem pat-
          terns and into new, positive ones, we need to understand something about
          drama. Specifically, it’s helpful to start thinking about life in terms of
          the different roles that we enact during our life’s performances. “All the
          world’s a stage,” Shakespeare observed, and we are the sum of the roles
          that we play on that stage.
               Some of our life roles have an automatic, scripted quality to them. Typ-
          ically we learned these roles early in life and, for years, they may have
          worked well for us. As a result, these roles have become overlearned. For
          instance, we may have learned to gain attention from parents by complain-
          ing or by acting up and breaking rules. Over time, those behaviors can
          crystallize into fixed roles: we automatically find ourselves whining or act-
          ing out of frustration during times of personal conflict. What worked in
          childhood by bringing us attention now works against us, interfering with
          careers and romantic relationships.
               Many trading problems have just such a scripted quality: We enact
          the same patterns repeatedly. We start by trading carefully and conscien-
          tiously. Then we lose money and become frustrated. Out of frustration we
          break trading rules, ignore stop-loss points, and undergo serious losses.
          Then we feel tremendous relief at exiting the losing positions and redouble
          our determination to trade carefully and conscientiously—until the next
          frustration comes around. Is this really so different from couples that are
          determined to get along with each other, then encounter frustrations, ar-
          gue and fight to the point of being ready to break up, only to experience
          relief as they make up and vow ever stronger to stop hurting each other?
          Or the person who swears that he will stop gambling, only to make a few
