P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              233


          market changes or to your taking more risk in each of your trades. You’ll
          see clearly how much drawdown is associated with a given level of volatil-
          ity, which will help you gauge your own tolerance.
               The second forecaster tool asks you to input the average size of your
          winning trade, your average ratio of winning to losing trades, and the ratio
          of the size of your average winners to losers. Run the forecaster many times
          with your data and you’ll see a variety of plausible sets of returns. This will
          give you a good sense for the expectable runs (to the upside and downside)
          in your trading, as well as the expectable returns over a 100-trade sequence.
               Finally, tweak the parameters from the second forecaster to simulate
          the paths of possible returns if your average winning trade shrinks (maybe
          due to slow markets) or if your ratio of winning to losing trades declines
          (perhaps because of misreading markets). Tweak the ratio of the size of
          your average winners and losers to see what happens to your returns if
          you lose discipline and hold losers too long or cut losers short, creating
          poor risk/reward per trade.
               All of these what-if scenarios will give you a good sense for what you
          can expect from your trading. It is much easier to deal with business ad-
          versity if you’ve planned for it in advance. When you’re coaching yourself,
          the more you know about your trading business, the better you’ll be able
          to make it grow.


                     COACHING CUE

          An important element of success in building a trading career is being able to
          identify periods of underperformance as quickly as possible, before they create
          large drawdowns. The more you know about your trading—the average sizes
          and durations of drawdowns and the variability around those averages—the
          better prepared you’ll be to identify departures from those norms. Keep statis-
          tics on your trading so you can also highlight periods in which you’re trading
          particularly well and learn from these episodes. The single most important step
          you can take to further your trading performance is to keep detailed metrics
          on your trading. These steps will highlight what you’re doing right and wrong,
          informing your self-coaching eﬀorts.




          LESSON 73: DIVERSIFY YOUR
          TRADING BUSINESS

          Suppose you have a passion for coffee and decide to start your own coffee-
          house as a business. You develop reliable sources for high quality beans,
