P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




                                    CHAPTER 10



                               Looking for
                                the Edge
                          Finding Historical Patterns
                                  in Markets



                    Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthu-
                    siasm and superstition.
                                                           —Adam Smith



                raders commonly refer to having an edge in markets. What this means

         T      is that they have a positive expectancy regarding the returns from
                their trades. Card counting can provide an edge to a poker player,
          but how can traders count the cards of their markets and put probabil-
          ities on their side? One way of accomplishing this is historical investi-
          gation. While history may not repeat exactly in markets, we can iden-
          tify patterns that have been associated with a directional edge in the
          past and hypothesize that these will yield similar tendencies in the im-
          mediate future. By knowing market history, we identify patterns to guide
          trade ideas.
               So how can we investigate market history to uncover such patterns?
          This has been a recurring topic of reader interest on the TraderFeed blog.
          If you’re going to mentor yourself as a trader, your efforts will be greatly
          aided by your ability to test the patterns you trade. After all, if you know
          the edge associated with what you’re trading, you’re most likely to sustain
          the confidence needed to see those trades through.
               A thorough presentation of testing market ideas would take a book
          in itself, but this chapter should get you started. Armed with a historical
          database and Excel, you can greatly improve your ability to find worthy
          market hypotheses to guide your trading. Let’s get started . . .




                                                                                     307
