P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                              125

              smaller risk exposure—I then gradually returned to my prior level of
              risk.


              Learning is best started in very safe environments and only later
              tackled in riskier situations. If you violate safety and security, you
              create distractions that interfere with learning.


               Note that if I were to make radical changes in my trading—say, switch
          from trading equity indexes to trading agricultural commodities—I would
          need an extensive period of time with chart review and simulation prior
          to putting any capital at risk. Those more substantial changes take longer
          to internalize; there is a more extensive learning curve. On average, we’ll
          make more mistakes when we attempt large changes rather than small
          tweaks. When you are your own coach, you provide more security and
          safety for big change efforts; the smaller pattern shifts can proceed with
          live trading and reduced risk exposure.
               One of the greatest mistakes traders make is to make a change once
          or twice and then jump immediately into larger risk-taking, giddy with
          the prospects of new returns from new habits. It is not unusual in my
          coaching and trading experience for trading results to get worse before
          they get better when tackling meaningful changes in trading practice. Just
          as you wouldn’t learn how to use the car’s brakes and gearshift in a couple
          lessons and then jump into highway driving, you don’t want to greatly alter
          your decision-making process while running full risk. As the Enhancing
          Trader Performance book stresses, the worst psychological mistake you
          can make is to traumatize yourself. If you create large drawdowns in your
          account because you weren’t prepared for your changes, the result will
          be damaging to both your trading performance and to your self-coaching.
          You want to structure the change process as much as possible to provide
          frequent successes and no emotionally damaging losses. This is how you
          sustain confidence and self-efficacy, even as you make your mistakes.
               Many traders are too eager to trade. They crave excitement and prof-
          its and find it difficult to trade in observation, simulation, and reduced
          risk modes. This short-circuits the process of generating repetitions that
          cement new patterns. Once traders undergo losses while making changes,
          they become self-doubting and pull back from their change efforts. Instead
          of generating success and confidence, traders learn to fear change. An
          important key to coaching yourself is to turn yourself into a generator of
          concentrated experience by making maximum use of practice and feed-
          back. We often seek change after periods of loss; it’s human nature to want
          to jump back into markets and regain the lost capital. But the goal is to
          instill the right trading behaviors, not to make money back all at once. If
          you internalize the right patterns, the results will naturally follow.
