P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008    12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          24                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          exceptions, lose money, and then out of relief step away from the casino
          once again, insisting that he won’t go back?


               Trading requires a mind free to process data and select appropriate
               action. But we no longer have a free will if we are mechanically
               reliving scripts from the past.


               A dramaturgic perspective suggests that these repetitive patterns are
          enactments—cyclical reenactments—of roles that we have learned in the
          course of life: the role of the down-and-out person who presses for success,
          the role of the aggrieved spouse, the role of the independent person who
          refuses to be bound by rules, and so forth. One trader I worked with grew
          up in an overprotective and controlling home. He rebelled as a teenager
          and subsequently found himself chafing at any constraints on his behavior.
          His violation of rules in relationships (monogamy) and trading (the risk-
          management rules of the firm) led to one failure after another. He was living
          out a script that could only provide unhappy endings.
               But if we can acquire scripts through our relationship experiences,
          then surely we can cultivate new ones by placing ourselves in different
          roles. One trader I worked with experienced himself as sloppy and undisci-
          plined. It showed not only in his trading, but also in his physical condition
          and the state of his apartment. His breakthrough occurred when he joined
          a fitness club and engaged a personal trainer. The regular series of classes
          and exercise sessions got him into shape and imposed a structure on his
          efforts at self-improvement. As he experienced more energy—and felt bet-
          ter about himself for getting in shape—he spontaneously took the initiative
          in cleaning his apartment and honing his trading rules. The sessions with a
          trainer provided him with a new script and positive experiences that mir-
          rored a fresh identity. By enacting a new role, he experienced himself in
          a new manner—and this infiltrated a variety of areas of his life.
               Here’s another example: For years I tended to be impatient—with my-
          self, with others, with trading, and even with the pace of change among
          people I met in therapy. When Margie and I had two children, however, I
          found myself in a new role that did not allow me to be impatient if I were
          going to be a good parent. Because it was clear that both our children had
          personalities very different from mine, I had to figure out ways to commu-
          nicate with them on their terms. The new role as a patient parent provided
          me with a discrepant set of experiences; I subsequently found myself more
          patient in a variety of situations, whether it was behind the wheel of a car
          or during counseling work with a client who felt stuck. The new role gen-
          erated novel, positive scripts. With the favorable mirroring over years of
          parenting, I’ve actually changed how I see myself. I now experience myself
