P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          177

              A good example from the previous lesson is situations in which
          you find yourself losing money on a trade and hoping or praying for a
          turnaround. I’ve even encountered traders who engage in a kind of bargain-
          ing (not unlike the dynamics of someone facing death in the Kubler-Ross
          work), promising to never violate their discipline again if they could just
          break even on this trade. The fact that hope is dominating the cognitive
          picture for the trader suggests that there is more than a little desperation.
          At some level, the trader is aware that this is not a good position to be
          holding. The underlying schema, however, says that it is not okay to lose
          money; that losing money equals failure. This makes even normal market
          losses unduly distressful, triggering maladaptive coping (holding positions
          beyond stop-loss points out of hope; doubling down on losing trades). If,
          however, the trader recognizes this pattern as it is occurring, he can use
          the appearance of hope to stop himself and disrupt the automatic thoughts
          and actions.


              The more vigorous your efforts at stopping, the more successful
              you’ll be in disrupting unwanted patterns of thought and behavior.

               Thought-stopping is useful because it separates you from your ways
          of thinking. Instead of identifying with automatic thoughts and the feelings
          they engender, you separate yourself from them and remind yourself that
          this is what has gotten you into trouble in the past. In the beginning, as you
          coach yourself, you will find that you have to engage in thought-stopping
          numerous times during a trading day. As you become more expert at rec-
          ognizing your negative thoughts and disrupting them, however, you find it
          easier and easier to stop yourself. A simple reminder of, “There I go again!”
          is sufficient to turn your mind to a different track. The interruption of ha-
          bitual thoughts itself becomes a positive habit pattern.
               I have found it helpful in my own trading to make the stop efforts par-
          ticularly impactful, almost as if I’m shaking myself awake and mobilizing
          other ways of dealing with situations. One time I caught myself holding a
          winning trade beyond the point at which it had reversed and returned to
          breakeven. A cardinal rule I’ve learned to follow is to not allow trades that
          have moved a threshold amount in my favor to become losing trades. As I
          watched the winning trade hit breakeven and then turn red, I caught my-
          self hoping that it would return to breakeven. The order flow was clearly
          suggesting, however, that large traders were hitting bids and driving the
          market lower. I gave myself a swift slap across the cheek and told myself
          to get out. That spontaneous act—admittedly not a coaching technique I
          use with other traders—woke me up and enabled me to take a small loss
          rather than a much larger one. However, I have remembered that slap over
          the years, and its impact has kept me out of trouble on multiple occasions.
