P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          92                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          to stop-losses can find it difficult to let profits run on winning trades.
          They stop those profits out prematurely, reducing the reward portion of
          the risk/reward profile. Over time, these traders have trouble succeed-
          ing, because their winning trades end up being not much larger than their
          losers—and sometimes smaller.
               There are a few reasons that traders tend to cut profits short. One rea-
          son is that they fail to identify profit targets as clearly as stop-loss points.
          Such targets may be based on a number of factors, such as the market’s
          overall volatility, the presence of distinct support and resistance levels, and
          the time frame of the pattern being traded. Many of my trades, for exam-
          ple, are based on historical analyses of the probability of hitting particular
          price levels (previous day’s high or low; pivot point levels based on the
          prior day’s high-low-close); those levels then serve as targets for setups. It
          is much easier to stick with a trade when there is a firm target in mind,
          just as it’s easier to get work done when you have a clear goal in mind.
          Without a predefined target, it’s easy to get caught up in the tick-by-tick ups
          and downs of the market, acting on fear and greed unrelated to the initial
          trade idea.
               Another culprit in those stop-profit scenarios is a lack of confidence
          in one’s trade ideas. One of the important advantages of testing one’s trad-
          ing setups is that you can estimate the historical odds of a market acting
          in your favor. That knowledge can provide the security necessary to see
          the trade through to its ultimate target. When trade setups and patterns
          are borrowed from others without prior testing (either through one’s own
          paper trading or through historical analysis), it is difficult to have a deep,
          inner sense of confidence in the ideas. As markets experience normal re-
          tracements on the way to a profit target, those adverse excursions become
          difficult to weather. Instead of seeing them as potential opportunities to
          add to the trade at good prices, it’s easy to perceive them as threats to
          paper profits.
               Finally, a trader’s risk aversion may play a role in prematurely stopping
          out profits. Suppose you have a choice between taking a sure $1,000 profit
          versus a 75 percent chance at $1,500 and a 25 percent chance at $500. Over
          time, taking the 75 percent chance will make you more money. Nonethe-
          less, at any given point in time, a person may feel that it’s foolish to walk
          away from a sure $1,000. In such a situation, the decision is made as much
          for the trader’s peace of mind as for overall profitability. Similarly, traders
          may set stop-profit levels to achieve a sense of certainty, not to maximize
          returns.
               Seeing a trade through to its target requires an unusual degree of se-
          curity and ability to tolerate uncertainty. As the trade moves further in
          your favor, you have more money in paper profits that you’re exposing to
          future risk, even if the risk/reward picture remains favorable. This ability
