P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          271


          LESSON 83: CULTIVATE
          SELF-AWARENESS

          Trevor Harnett enjoys an interesting perspective on the trading world.
          He is a seasoned trader, and he is someone who runs a software firm
          that provides tools for traders. As a result, he has observed his learning
          curve, but also the curves of traders who utilize his Market Delta soft-
          ware (www.marketdelta.com). While Market Delta incorporates a number
          of charting features, the heart of the program is its ability to separate vol-
          ume traded at the market’s offer price and volume transacted at the bid.
          This distinction enables traders to obtain instantaneous readings of short-
          term sentiment. This is very valuable for intraday traders, and it provides a
          useful execution tool for longer timeframe traders.
              Michael Seneadza is a full-time trader and author of the Trader Mike
          blog (www.tradermike.net). When I first entered the world of blogging,
          Michael’s was one of the very first blogs I read regularly. It seemed to me
          that he had a fine grasp for short-term trading, including the news items
          that move markets. His blog posts the stocks he’s following for the day,
          as well as market and news updates. Michael keeps it real—his site is de-
          void of hype and self-promotion—which helps account for its popularity.
          I grouped Trevor and Michael together for this lesson because they both
          touched on an important facet of self-coaching: being self-aware and act-
          ing as one’s own psychologist.
              When I asked Trevor for the three things that have most contributed
          to his self-coaching, he replied, “Upon looking back at my trading career,
          the three factors that have influenced my trading the most are 1) the envi-
          ronment I put myself into, 2) the discipline I exercised as a trader and else
          where in my life, and 3) self-awareness in terms of personality and how I
          viewed the markets.” Let’s take a look at those.

              Environment
              When Trevor started trading, he made sure that he was close to the ac-
              tion and rented an office in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange building.
              “I had plenty of desire but little knowledge and few friends or men-
              tors to show me the way,” Trevor explains. “Being in an environment
              with lots of seasoned traders was important to me.” Trevor learned
              most from these traders’ mistakes. “A majority of what I learned by
              being around other traders was what not to do,” Trevor pointed out.
              “I learned valuable lessons from other traders, but the lessons that
              have kept me trading over the years are the lessons I learned from
              other traders on not what to do. For me, being in an environment that
