P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                            167


          LESSON 52: USE FEELING TO
          UNDERSTAND YOUR THINKING

          One of the best ways to identify the automatic thinking that could most
          jeopardize your trading is to track your strongest feelings. In the cognitive
          framework, how we feel is a function of our perception: how we see things
          and how we interpret what we see shape our emotional responses. When
          our interpretations of events are extreme, we’re most likely to respond with
          extreme feelings. Those occasions in which we look back at our behavior
          with embarrassment, wondering how we could have blown things so out of
          proportion, are most likely reflections of times in which we were controlled
          by the automatic thoughts from distorted mental maps.
               If, say, I think about the times in which I most completely lose my
          temper, they would be occasions in which I want to accomplish something
          but find my path blocked for no apparent good reason. Perhaps I’m trying
          to get to an appointment on time and find myself behind a slow driver who
          is absorbed in a cell phone call. Or it could be a situation in which I’m trying
          to accomplish something with a trader at a firm, but find myself stymied by
          a bureaucratic response. The thought behind my temper outburst is, “I have
          to get this done, now!”
               Often these are situations that aren’t life or death: they don’t truly need
          to be accomplished there and then. My schema says, however, that if some-
          thing doesn’t get done now, that would be awful; it would be a catastrophe.
          I am responding to my own internal should and must, not to the objective
          demands of the situation. The exaggerated emotional response is a tip-off
          to an entrenched thought pattern that distorts my perception.

              When we turn a desire into a demand, we mobilize the body and
              respond with stress.

              In psychodynamic work, the focus would be historical: figuring out
          past relationship patterns that might have initiated my particular way of
          thinking and feeling. The cognitive framework, however, is less concerned
          with the origins of the thinking patterns than on what we do in the present
          to recognize and modify those. By tracking our extreme emotional re-
          sponses as they are occurring, we can learn to recognize the thought pat-
          terns that affect us in the present and eventually challenge these. In the
          cognitive approach, this is accomplished literally by teaching yourself to
          think differently and filter the world through a different set of lenses.
              For example, when I pressure myself about time and tasks that I want
          to accomplish, I recognize the mounting frustration and tell myself that
