P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          190                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              A common myth held by traders is that they need to be hard on
          themselves to maintain their motivation. This is another situation where
          a week’s experiment can be helpful: make a conscious effort to stay con-
          structive and positive every day for a week, and let’s see how you feel and
          how you trade. When a trader sees that when he gives up the negative pat-
          tern he actually improves his concentration and the process of his trading,
          he gains considerable incentive to extend the experiment.
              Your assignment, as your own trading coach, is to create a simple
          experiment—even if it’s just for the span of a single day—in which you
          disrupt the negative thought patterns you’ve identified and just see what
          happens to your mood and your trading. If you don’t like the results of
          the experiment, you can always go back to old ways and retool. If, how-
          ever, you find that you can focus on trading better, that you stick to your
          plans better, and feel better about your work as a result, then you can de-
          cide to extend the experiment in time and perhaps also to other facets of
          your life. Our negative thought patterns have been the result of learning;
          surely we are capable of acquiring new ways of viewing our trading and
          ourselves. Well-constructed experiments provide us with the catalyst for
          changing that viewing—and that can change our doing.


                     COACHING CUE

          Every trading rule can be turned into a cognitive experiment: See what happens
          when you follow the rule religiously—your trading results, your mood, and your
          decision-making. Many times, traders harbor fears in the backs of their minds
          as to negative consequences of sticking by their rules. By constructing exper-
          iments around the rules, we can see, ﬁrsthand, that these consequences are
          manageable and nothing to be feared.




          LESSON 60: BUILD POSITIVE THINKING

          The lessons for cognitive coaching thus far have emphasized ways to iden-
          tify and restructure negative, automatic thoughts. What, however, of pos-
          itive thought patterns? How can we become more intentional in building
          these? Fortunately, many of the cognitive techniques that work well to un-
          learn negative thought patterns can also be used effectively to cement pos-
          itive ways to view self and world.
               Note that the positive thinking we’re looking to build is not necessarily
          positive in the superficial sense. Look into a mirror and tell yourself how
          you’re the best trader, how you’re going to make so much money, etc. This
