P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         161


                     COACHING CUE

          Find at least one person to whom you are accountable for your development
          as a trader. This should be someone you can trust in sharing your P/L, your
          trading journals, and your tracking ofpersonal goals. A major advantage en-
          joyed by traders at professional trading ﬁrms is that they are automatically ac-
          countable for performance and can thus openly discuss success and failure with
          mentors and risk managers. Accountability leaves no place to hide; it’s an ex-
          cellent strategy for combating defensiveness and removing the threat behind
          setbacks.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter 5:
          http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-five-links.html
               An excellent overview of psychodynamic approaches to brief therapy
          can be found in Hanna Levenson’s chapter “Time-Limited Dynamic Psy-
          chotherapy: Formulation and Intervention” in The Art and Science of Brief
          Psychotherapies, edited by Mantosh J. Dewan, Brett N. Steenbarger, and
          Roger P. Greenberg (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2004).
               A worthwhile resource for building emotional self-awareness is Leslie
          S. Greenberg’s Emotion-Focused Therapy: Coaching Clients to Work
          Through Their Feelings (American Psychological Association, 2002). See
          also the classic text by Leslie S. Greenberg, Laura N. Rice, and Robert
          Elliott, Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-by-Moment Process
          (Guilford, 1993).
               Articles relevant to psychodynamics and self-coaching can be found
          in the “Articles on Trading Psychology” section of my personal site:
          www.brettsteenbarger.com/articles.htm. These articles include “Behav-
          ioral Patterns That Sabotage Traders” and “Brief Therapy for Traders.”
               It is rare to find trading coaches who know anything about psycho-
          dynamics; a notable exception is Denise Shull, who wrote the chapter,
          “What Would Freud Say: Stroll Down Freud’s Mental Path to Profits” in the
          book edited by Laura Sether, The Psychology of Trading (W&A Publishing,
          2007).
