P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          114                                                      THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               The real power of the solution focus is that, when you discover what
          you do during your best trading, those positive patterns are uniquely yours.
          Instead of ceding the role of expert and guru to others, you’re turning your-
          self into your own guru by finding the best practices that are unique to you.
          You become your own role model. This is one of the most promising facets
          of self-coaching: by discovering who you are at your best, you can create
          goals that are specific, unique, and relevant to you. The learning, as a result,
          will be more relevant and empowering, reinforcing strengths as you build
          them.
               A great assignment is to review your trading journal and assess the ra-
          tio of problem entries (writings about your bad trading) to solution entries
          (writings about what you’re doing best). If the ratio is lopsided in favor of
          the problem focus, consider structuring your writing to force yourself to
          address a few basic questions:
            r What, specifically, am I doing best in my recent trading?
            r How, specifically, am I avoiding old trading mistakes when I’m trading
              well?
            r How, specifically, am I trading like my idea of the ideal trader during
              my best trading?

              A good sports coach never loses sight of a player’s potential, even when
          correcting weaknesses. The challenge of self-coaching is never losing sight
          of your strengths, and then working daily on how you can maximize them.

                      COACHING CUE

          We have solution markets as well as solution patterns of behavior: speciﬁc mar-
          kets and market conditions that facilitate our most successful trading. Knowing
          these intimately is very helpful in allocating risk to your trade ideas. It can also
          be helpful in staying out of certain kinds of trades and emphasizing others.



          LESSON 36: DISRUPT OLD
          PROBLEM PATTERNS

          As you continue your journaling over a period of weeks or longer, you
          will become attuned to your problem patterns. Usually, a trader does
          not have 10 different problems. Rather, he may have one or two prob-
          lems that manifest themselves in 10 different ways. For instance, a trader
          may grapple with missing good trades, occasionally ignoring stop-loss lev-
          els, sizing positions too conservatively, and cutting winning trades too
          quickly. These examples may seem like different problems, each requiring
          a different coaching plan and process. As the trader examines his or her
