P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55   Printer: Yet to come




          298                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Larry Fisher’s responses to the question of the three self-coaching
          practices that have most aided his trading reflect his teaching practices at
          his firm, which in turn reflect his years of trading experience. Here’s what
          he has to say:

              Writing a Trading Journal
              “Over the years, I have used a journal as a medium to make sure that I
              am in tune with my emotions,” Larry explains. “The journaling process
              has become a very important part of my trading routine. I have realized
              that writing in my journal pays huge dividends, especially when I am
              trading well and I am trading poorly. The process keeps me grounded,
              while often limiting the duration of trading slumps and extending pe-
              riods of trading successes.” Notice that Larry employs the journal ef-
              fectively both when he’s trading well and when he’s not. This keeps
              him attuned to emotions in a positive way—it grounds him in confi-
              dent trading when he’s seeing markets well—and it enables him to take
              corrective action quickly when he’s not in tune with the stocks he’s
              trading. So often the difference between the successful trader and the
              unsuccessful one is how they handle being very right and very wrong.
              The journal, properly constructed, can be a tool for adjusting to these
              extremes, enabling you to add risk when you’re trading well and pull
              back when you’re not.


              The trading journal is a means for sustaining self-observation.


              Communicating with Peers
              Larry Fisher notes, “I have a network of friends and colleagues with
              whom I make an effort to communicate on a regular basis. This allows
              me to learn from others while sharing real-time market experiences.
              These conversations aid me in dealing with the ebb and flow associated
              with being a professional trader.” This theme arises again and again
              with the best traders: they have a rich network of contacts that help
              them personally and professionally. Larry’s observation echoes what
              we heard from Ray Barros: there is always an ebb and flow to trading;
              profitable times and lean times. Being able to connect with traders who
              have been through the cycles and know how to move beyond them can
              be a tremendous support. We also underestimate the power of social
              interaction as a means of cognition: some of us simply think more
              effectively when we think aloud. Sounding boards for our ideas helps
              us hone our market views and make better decisions.
