P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          230                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              Long before you seek to trade for a living, you should work at trad-
              ing competence: just breaking even after costs.

              When you are your own trading coach, you’re also the manager and
          entrepreneur of your own trading business. That means that you have to
          start with a viable plan for success. Among other things, that plan should
          address:

           1. How you’ll learn markets and obtain trading competencies.
           2. How you’ll capitalize your business so that you can make a good in-
              come from realistic, solid risk-adjusted returns.

               If you cannot raise the capital needed to make a living from realisti-
          cally good returns, then your challenge is to make yourself attractive to
          trading firms that can front you sufficient trading capital. Take the steps
          needed to become attractive to such a firm and make that part of your
          business plan; this will form the basis for the next lesson. For now, your
          assignment is simply to learn markets before you put significant capital at
          risk, establish success over a range of market conditions and cycles, and
          ensure adequate access to capital before you give up your day job. Stress
          test the startup plan for your trading business: calculate how you would
          get by if returns were modest for the first couple of years. Run your plan by
          seasoned traders who make their living from markets; find the weak spots
          and address them. As the old saying goes, failing to plan is tantamount to
          planning to fail.

                     COACHING CUE

          One of the smartest business decisions I made in my trading was to begin with
          an account small enough that it would not impact my family’s lifestyle if I lost
          every penny. Early in my development, I had no illusions of trading for a living;
          my goal was to simply get better. A major milestone in my development came
          when I could consistently keep losing trades smaller than winners. Early in my
          trading eﬀorts, it was a few large losers that impaired my overall performance.
          Had I been trading with money needed for my family’s well-being, the stress of
          making rookie mistakes would have been overwhelming. Margie referred to my
          trading account as play money; she never counted on it or the income from it
          in our ﬁnancial planning. Without the pressure of proﬁtability demands early in
          my development, I was free to make mistakes and learn from them. A sure way
          to maximize stress and lower your odds of success is to put your capital at risk
          before you have cultivated your skills.
