P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          28                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          efforts on your highest probability trades as your plan for a drawdown pe-
          riod. In Ranger school, the Army exposes recruits to the most harrowing
          physical conditions possible. Once recruits have completed their training,
          they have the deep conviction that they can handle any and all battle con-
          ditions. You want to view your losing trades and your losing periods in
          markets as your Ranger School, your trial by fire.


               Your losing trades and losing periods are your trials by fire that
               build resilience and confidence.


               How will you handle a significant losing trade? How will you handle
          a significant losing day? Week? Month? How will you ensure that you can
          draw upon your strengths and come back from these losses and build your
          resilience? Your assignment is to develop your plans for losing, to always
          know—and mentally rehearse—what will get you out of trades and out of
          markets, so that you can retool your efforts.
               In psychology, crisis does offer opportunity: it shakes up our assump-
          tions and forces us to make changes in how we think and act. Your chal-
          lenge as your own coach is to find the opportunity in your crises by gener-
          ating and rehearsing plans for anything and everything that can go wrong.
          To prepare for hurricanes and tornadoes, communities not only draw up
          disaster plans, but also conduct drills to put these into practice. Change is
          a function of preparation and training: drilling the right responses, so that
          they are second nature when market disaster looms.


                     COACHING CUE

          Just before I wrote this section of the book, a savvy trader contacted me and
          explained that he broke some of his rules and lost the proﬁts from the prior
          week. He was very upset and wrote a memo to himself to ensure that he learned
          from the experience. He sent the memo to me and insisted that we talk in a
          few days to ensure that he followed up on the memo. It’s a great example of
          how a trader takes a losing situation and turns it into an opportunity for self-
          improvement. He won’t let the issue go until he’s rectiﬁed his errors.
               That’s how traders turn losing experiences into conﬁdence builders. Next
          time you blow up in your trading, write yourself a detailed memo that explains
          what went wrong, why it went wrong, and what you will do to avoid the problem
          going forward. Then send the memo to a valued trading buddy for follow up to
          hold yourself accountable. That way, every big mistake becomes a catalyst for
          meaningful change.
