P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          198                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          to learn a new trick can learn to avoid tainted food after getting sick on it
          just once. Emotion accelerates behavioral learning. This is the source of
          many trading problems, and it also opens the door to powerful behavioral
          coaching methods.
               As your own trading coach, it is important that you understand your
          own contingencies: the linkages between your expectations and your be-
          haviors. Instead of thinking of your trading problems as irrational, think
          of them as learned patterns that are supported by something positive that
          you gain or something negative that you avoid. Something is reinforcing
          your worst trading behaviors: once you understand that contingency, you
          are well-positioned to remove the reinforcement and introduce new rein-
          forcers of desired trading patterns.


              Behavioral coaching is about reinforcing the right behaviors and
              removing reinforcement from the wrong ones.


              To get started, think back to your most recent episode of truly bad
          trading. I can recall, for instance, a recent incident in which I so convinced
          myself of a turnaround in a falling market that I held a position well beyond
          the original stop-loss point. What is the reinforcement in that situation? In
          my case, I had been on a nice winning streak and I didn’t want that to end.
          I associated getting out of the trade with breaking my streak; as long as I
          was in the trade, I could retain hope that my streak would be intact.
              That reasoning makes no sense of course and, if pursued to its logical
          conclusion, I could have given back every ounce of profit I made during the
          streak just by holding the one bad trade. But the emotional connection was
          strong: I was attached to the winning—so much so that its pull was greater
          than the pull of simply trading well.
              So take a look at your most recent episode of horrific trading. What
          gain were you associating with the bad trading? What negatives were you
          looking to avoid? What was the contingency at work? As previous lessons

                      COACHING CUE

          Identify the emotions that are most painful for you and then track their occur-
          rence during your trading. For some traders, this will be the pain of losing. Other
          traders respond negatively to boredom or to the helplessness of uncertainty.
          Many times your worst trading decisions will be the result of trying to rid your-
          self of those emotions. This negative reinforcement leads to hasty, unplanned
          trading behaviors that seem to make no sense in retrospect. If you can identify
          the negative reinforcement at work, you can more consciously and construc-
          tively deal with the diﬃcult feelings.
