P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          336                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          differently in the last several instances than it has historically, I enter-
          tain the possibility that we’re seeing a shift in market patterns. If I see
          the last few instances behaving abnormally across many different variables
          and time frames, those anomalies strengthen my sense of a market shift.
               When I see how results have played out over the years, I become a less
          naı̈ve trend follower. I don’t automatically assume that rising markets will
          continue to skyrocket or that falling markets will continue to plunge. I’ve
          developed tools for determining when trending markets are gaining and
          losing steam; these have been helpful in anticipating reversals. Seeing how
          these indicators behave under various market conditions over time—and
          actually quantifying their track record—has provided me with a measure
          of confidence in the ideas that I would not have in the absence of intimacy
          with the data.
               Much of the edge in trading comes from seeing markets in unique ways,
          catching moves before they occur or early in their appearance. It is easy to
          become fixed in our views, with vision narrowed by looking at too few
          markets and patterns. As your own trading coach, you need to keep your
          mind open and fresh. Read, talk with experienced traders, follow a range
          of markets closely, test patterns historically, and know what’s happening
          globally: you’ll see things that never register on the radar of the average
          trader. You’ll be at your most creative when you have the broadest vision.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you examine historical patterns, go into your data set and speciﬁcally
          examine the returns from the occasions that didn’t ﬁt into the pattern. This will
          give you an idea of the kind of drawdowns you could expect if you were to trade
          the pattern mechanically. Many times, the exceptions to patterns end up being
          large moves; for instance, most occasions may show a countertrend tendency
          with a relative handful of very large trending moves. If you know this, you can
          look for those possible exceptions, study them, and maybe even identify and
          proﬁt from them.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter 10:
          http:// becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com / 2008 / 08 / daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-ten-links.html
