P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          76                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          corresponding yields on (taxable) Treasury instruments and certificates
          of deposit. Our plan was to lock in these positions as investments, not
          as short-term trades. Over time, we felt, we would benefit from attractive
          yields and possible capital appreciation as tax-free yields fell into line with
          those of taxable instruments. We could make this investment comfortably
          because it represented less than 10 percent of our savings. Our remaining
          capital was diversified in other investments, working for us even as our
          bonds might move against us in the short run. We could stay focused on
          our overall investment plan because we were so diversified that we didn’t
          need any one position to perform wonderfully.

               Diversification, in life and markets, reduces performance pressure
               and allows us to become immersed in what we are doing.


               Similarly, a trader who risks a small portion of her account on a trade
          can stay focused on executing an overall trading plan, because there is no
          acute need for that position to work out—and no acute threat if it fails to
          work.
               This is a psychological paradox: To best focus on any single perfor-
          mance, it helps to be diversified among performances. If I have a suc-
          cessful experience as a father, husband, and psychologist, I don’t need my
          books to sell well or my trades to make money. It is precisely that emo-
          tional diversification that enables me to stay focused on my writing and
          trading and achieve satisfying returns from them.
               As your own trading coach you don’t need to spend more and more
          time, effort, and emotion on markets. Indeed, if you place all your psycho-
          logical eggs in the trading basket, it is a sure way to burn yourself out and
          stay out of a performance zone. Rather, you can best coach yourself by en-
          suring that trading is one among many fulfilling activities within your life.
          Other eggs might go into the baskets of spiritual interests, artistic activi-
          ties, athletic pursuits, social life, intellectual life, family, community, and
          hobbies. If your life is full in those ways, you are best able to weather ups
          and downs in trading performance. You no longer need trading to work
          at any particular point in time, so you become more able to focus on the
          process of trading and generate and execute good trades.
               So this is your assignment: Give yourself a grade for how much inter-
          est and satisfaction you’ve been achieving from the areas of life mentioned
          above. How diversified are you in your sources of well-being? Then select
          one area for cultivation to improve your emotional diversification. Not only
          will you find a new source of enjoyment and accomplishment, you will
          also lay the psychological groundwork—the inner sense of security and
          fulfillment—to find and stay in your performance zone.
