P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                           179

               With practice, you can become quite good at proactively steering your
          mind from self-focused thoughts. During one recent trading episode, I
          caught myself looking up my P/L in the middle of a trade, wondering how
          well I was doing and how much I was willing to give up of my week’s gains.
          Of course, that had nothing whatsoever to do with the merits of the trade I
          was in. Because of prior practice, I was able to stop myself from clicking on
          the P/L summary before the numbers could get into my head. Reminding
          yourself that “it’s not about me”—it’s about the markets—is an excellent
          start to maintaining control over your decisions in the heat of market ac-
          tion. If you stop yourself from doing the wrong things, you clear the decks
          for implementing sound trading practices.


                     COACHING CUE

          When I work with traders, one of my roles is to help them stop the ﬂow of neg-
          ative, automatic thoughts. Even when you’re coaching yourself, however, you
          can derive the same beneﬁt by keeping in touch with one or more trusted and
          valued trading peers during market hours. This can be in a single trading oﬃce
          or via Skype, Hotcomm, or even instant messaging. Many times your mates will
          pick up on your negative thinking before you’re aware of their appearance. This
          can be very helpful in checking yourself and refocusing your attention.




          LESSON 56: REFRAME NEGATIVE
          THOUGHT PATTERNS

          Reframing is a psychological technique that takes a problem pattern and
          places it in a different context so that it can be viewed in fresh ways, open-
          ing the door to new responses. Suppose I’m meeting with a trader who is
          experiencing occasional bouts of performance anxiety that leave him un-
          able to act on clear trading signals. He views himself as a weak person who
          can never succeed at trading. I take a different perspective, emphasizing
          his prudence about taking risk and his success at avoiding large losses.
          “Perhaps we can use that same good judgment to identify and act upon op-
          portunity in a way that keeps you secure,” I suggest. What the trader frames
          as weakness, I reframe as a potential strength. Instead of fighting against
          his own tendencies, the trader can use the reframing to help him figure out
          how to use those tendencies to produce acceptable risk-adjusted returns.


              Often we can find a strength underlying one of our weaknesses,
              enabling us to approach problem patterns in novel ways.
