P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               101


          I believe it’s because many traders are motivated by trading and making
          money, not by a desire to understand themselves and markets. This is an
          important distinction. To paraphrase coach Bob Knight, they are motivated
          to win, but not motivated to do the work it takes to become a winner. In
          the best traders, self-mastery is a core motivation. It’s why they continue
          trading long after they could have comfortably retired.
               The most common format for beginning a regimen of self-monitoring is
          keeping a journal. The basic components of a self-monitoring journal might
          look as follows:
               Divide your journal page into three columns. The first column de-
          scribes the trade that was placed, including the trade size and the time
          of day. If you scale into a single position, you would treat that as a single
          entry in the journal. Similarly, if you enter several positions to capitalize on
          a single trade idea (e.g., you want to be long precious metals, so you buy
          three different mining stocks), those would also be incorporated within a
          single journal entry. The first column might thus summarize what you did
          for each trade idea, how much you risked on the idea, when you placed
          the trades, the prices that you paid, and how you placed the trades (e.g.,
          all at once or by scaling in; executed at the market or with limit orders). If
          you are a high-frequency trader, consider the possibility of automating your
          trade monitoring with tools such as StockTickr (www.stocktickr.com) or
          Trader DNA (www.traderdna.com).
               The second column would summarize the outcomes of the trades, in-
          cluding the prices and times of your exits, your P/L for that trade (or trade
          idea), and how you exited the trades (e.g., all at once or scaling out, at the
          market or by working orders).
               The third column would include all of your behavioral observations
          for that particular trade or trade idea: what you were thinking, how you
          were feeling, your preparation for that trade, your degree of confidence in
          the trade, etc. In other words, the third column takes a look at you and
          your state of mind, thought patterns, and physical state during the trades.
          The third column could also include observations about how well you en-
          tered, managed, and exited the trades. Whatever stands out for you—good
          or bad—about the trade would be included in that third column.


              Keep your trading journal doable; many efforts at self-monitoring
              fail because they become onerous.


              For a trader such as myself who only place, at most, a few trades
          per day, such a journal is relatively easy to keep. Prop traders who make
          dozens of trades per day or more, however, are likely to find such a journal
