P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          300                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          a quiet, confident mind. It does take dedicated time each day to sustain the
          quiet mind, but it comes more easily with experience. Find a room with no
          distractions—no noise—and keep yourself totally still as you fix your atten-
          tion on something in the room: an object on the wall, music in headphones,
          etc. Then breathe very deeply and slowly, keeping your attention as fixed
          as possible. You’ll find yourself able to tune out fear and greed, anxiety and
          overconfidence as you sustain a high level of concentration and fix your at-
          tention on an emotionally neutral stimulus. The best trading practices and
          environments cannot benefit you if you are not in a state to make good use
          of them. Quite literally, with each breath, you can be coaching yourself.


                     COACHING CUE

          I have found that if I start my day with physical exercise and biofeedback, I can
          sustain calm concentration as an eﬀective strategy for maximizing my energy
          and focus. If you start your day run down and distracted, you’re likely to become
          even more fatigued and scattered during the trading day. Part of preparation
          is to study the market; part is also to keep yourself in a physical and cognitive
          mode that maximizes performance.




          LESSON 90: USE DATA TO IMPROVE
          TRADING PERFORMANCE

          Rainsford “Rennie” Yang is the author of the Market Tells web site and
          newsletter (www.markettells.com), which generates trade ideas through
          historical analyses of stock market behavior. His service is unusually help-
          ful in finding trading edges, particularly with respect to generating trend-
          catcher alerts during the day. The ideas can either be traded outright or can
          be used to inform discretionary decisions from favored setups. For traders
          who don’t have the time, skills, or inclination to conduct their own histori-
          cal research (see Chapter 10), a service such as Market Tells is invaluable.
               David Adler is the Director of Trader DNA (www.traderdna.com),
          which markets a program for tracking trading performance over time. The
          software captures information about futures trades and generates a series
          of metrics that reveal areas of trading strength and weakness. This informa-
          tion is especially helpful for high-frequency traders, who would find it im-
          possible to manually enter trades into a log for analysis. Results are charted
          as well as summarized in print, providing easy-to-understand reports.
               When I asked Rennie to summarize his most useful self-coaching prac-
          tices, he most generously shared some of the patterns from his historical
          research. He included daily/weekly analysis and intraday analysis in his re-
          sponse, which I quote extensively in the following pages.
