P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          188                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               As your own trading coach, you want to use tools such as the journal
          in a way that helps your trading, not that becomes burdensome. It takes a
          bit of experimentation to see how the journal best fits into your workflow
          and routine. An excellent rule is that you won’t make significant progress
          until the time you spend in the self-coaching mode exceeds the time you
          spend in the throes of negative, automatic thinking. The journal is a useful
          way to ensure that you get that coaching time.



          LESSON 59: CONDUCT COGNITIVE
          EXPERIMENTS TO CREATE CHANGE

          If people are like scientists, who construct their theories of the world based
          on their observations and experience, then it should be possible to treat
          their expectations as hypotheses that could either be confirmed or contra-
          dicted. When you generate new observations and experiences that discon-
          firm negative thought patterns, you gradually modify those patterns and
          eliminate their distortions.
               Sometimes just a review of recent experience in a Socratic dialogue
          can be enough to challenge and modify negative views. “Whatever I do in
          the market is wrong!” might be one negative thought that automatically
          kicks in when the trader is losing money. A simple review of recent re-
          sults, however, may bring the trader back to reality: “Wait a minute. I’ve
          had some excellent trades this week. I need to step back and figure out
          what’s working for me.”
               When you’re in the midst of negative thoughts, we’ve seen that it helps
          to take the role of the observer and ask, “Is this really true? Is this what I
          would be saying to someone else in my shoes? Is this what I would want
          someone else to be saying to me right now?” By disconfirming those nega-
          tive thoughts, you make them less automatic—less able to take control of
          your decisions.
               Sometimes, however, constructing specific experiments to challenge
          your negative thoughts and expectations can provide the right experience
          to jar and reshape your beliefs. One trader I worked with insisted that di-
          versification didn’t matter to him; he just wanted to be right on his trades.
          When he saw a good idea in a sector, he bought every name in the group,
          piling into the trade. Of course, the stocks moved in a correlated way; he
          probably would have been just as well off if he had bought the sector ETF
          and had saved some commissions. His thought pattern, “This is a great idea;
          I have to go all in,” led him to risk a large amount of his capital on a single
          idea, even as he tried to convince himself that he was diversified because
          he held many names in his book.
