P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          38                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your learning and development. The following expectations are among the
          most trader-toxic:

           1. A Good Day Is a Winning Day. Here’s an assumption and expecta-
               tion that ensures that our emotional experience will rise and fall with
               our P/L. We generally expect to have a good day; by equating a good
               day with a winning day, we set ourselves up for disappointment when
               the normal uncertainty of markets leaves us in the red. A good day is
               one in which we follow sound trading practices, from skilled execu-
               tion to prudent risk management. Some good days will bring profits,
               others will not. We can trade poorly and stumble into a profit; we can
               place a trade with a two-thirds probability of success and lose money
               as often as an all-star baseball hitter gets a hit. We should expect to
               have good days, if those are defined by sound trading practice. If sound
               practices don’t generate profits over time, we may need to tweak those
               practices. But going into trading expecting profits each day is a formula
               for emotional letdown.


               Never set a goal if you’re not in full control of its attainment.


           2. Working Harder at Trading Means Trading More Often. This as-
              sumption is that, if you trade more, you’ll learn more and build skills
              more quickly. The result is overtrading and a likely forfeiture of prof-
              its over time to market makers and brokers. Every trade starts as a
              loser. You’re losing the bid-offer spread if you buy and sell at the mar-
              ket, and you certainly lose a transaction fee. A loss of a single tick per
              trade due to execution, on top of a substantial retail commission, eas-
              ily ensures losses of thousands of dollars to day traders who otherwise
              break even on their trades. As we trade more often without a distinct
              edge to each trade, our broker becomes richer and we become broker.
              Pointing and clicking to execute trades is a small part of the process
              by which traders develop expertise. The lion’s share of development
              occurs by tracking patterns in simulation and real time, practicing exe-
              cuting and stopping out trades on paper (and in simulation mode) prior
              to risking capital, and researching trading ideas. By expecting trading
              itself to generate learning, we ensure that our motivation for learning
              will lead to overtrading—and a loss of both capital and motivation.
           3. Success Means Making a Living from Trading. Here is another ex-
              pectation guaranteed to generate frustration and discouragement. No
              developing professional makes their living from their performances
              during the early years of expertise building. A golfer or tennis player
              may spend years on a college team and as an amateur before even
              starting the pro circuit. Star actors or actresses typically spend years
