P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               111

               As you examine your journal entries for the patterns that distinguish
          your best and worst trading, the question you want to ask is, “What is the
          difference that will make the greatest difference in my trading?” Stated
          otherwise, your question is, “What are the one or two ways I can trade
          more like my best trading and less like my worst trading?” The answer to
          these questions will form the basis for your best process goals—and will
          guide your self-development efforts from day to day and week to week.
          Goals should not be so specific that they only apply to a limited set of cir-
          cumstances (“I want to be a market buyer when put/call ratios hit 100-day
          highs”), and they should not be so broad or vague that they don’t guide
          concrete actions (“I want to trade less often”). The best goals are ones you
          can work on every day for a number of weeks. If you do not work on a
          goal day after day for at least several weeks, it’s unlikely that you will turn
          your new patterns into positive habits.
               As mentioned earlier, you don’t want to focus on too many goals at
          once. I’ve generally found three to be as many as I can work on with con-
          sistent intensity—and many times I will focus on fewer objectives. This
          means that a good self-coach will prioritize needed changes, emphasizing
          those differences that will most make a difference. A great exercise to try is
          to close your eyes and imagine yourself as a great trader. Visualize yourself
          as the best trader you can possibly be—or maybe visualize an absolutely
          perfect trading day. What are you doing differently from your usual trading
          when you’re the great trader? How is your trading different on the perfect
          day than on poor one? In your visualizations, try seeing yourself doing all
          the right things when you’re trading well. What are you doing? How are you
          doing it? Those visions, made highly specific, will form the backbones of
          your goals.


                     COACHING CUE

          Make it a point to get to know successful traders who have had plenty of market
          experience. Many times you can form eﬀective goals by simply trying to emulate
          their best trading qualities.




          LESSON 35: BUILD ON YOUR BEST:
          MAINTAIN A SOLUTION FOCUS

          To this point, the lessons in this chapter have emphasized the im-
          portance of tracking the patterns associated with both your trading
          shortcomings and your trading successes. It is common to focus on the
