P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          22                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          is an important distinction. Everyone experiences distracting thoughts at
          times. When we identify with those thoughts, however, they—not our
          markets, not our plans—become our focus.

               Negative thoughts are inevitable; the question is whether you buy
               into them.

               Meditation can be a very helpful exercise. One purpose of medita-
          tion is to help people create a quiet mind by sustaining a single point
          of concentration and brushing aside all distracting internal dialogue and
          impulse. A simple adaptation of meditation for you to try is to take
          15 minutes before the start of trading and seat yourself in a comfortable po-
          sition, breathing slowly and rhythmically from the diaphragm. While in that
          position, focus your attention on quiet instrumental music played through
          headphones. You want to be as absorbed as possible in the music: as soon
          as your mind wanders, bring it back to the music and the sounds of the
          different instruments.
               Once you’ve been able to sustain that focus for a few minutes, you then
          purposely bring to mind your greatest performance concerns—while you
          stay seated, focused, and breathing rhythmically and deeply. You evoke
          one concern at a time (for example, thoughts or fears about your recent
          profitability) and then dismiss the thoughts and bring yourself back to the
          music. Instead of having the thoughts intrude on you unexpectedly, you in-
          tentionally call them to mind and practice and then put them away, as you
          stay calm and focused. You might even guide yourself through imagery as
          you’re breathing deeply and slowly, imagining your negative thoughts as
          trash that you decide to put in a garbage pail. Instead of avoiding your neg-
          ative thoughts, bring them to mind as your own, inner trash-talking—and
          then visualize yourself taking out the garbage.
               Do this every day for a few minutes and you can train yourself to gain
          control over negative thought patterns. Most importantly, you develop the
          capacity to become an observer to those thoughts, rather than to identify


                     COACHING CUE

          Whenever you catch yourself thinking about your P/L during trading—how much
          you’re making or losing—call a brief time-out; take a few deep, rhythmical
          breaths and talk out what you’re seeing in the markets at the time. Your goal
          is to be market-focused, not self-focused. By repeatedly pairing a calm, relaxed
          state with an intense market focus, you can develop a positive habit pattern and
          ensure that the body keeps the mind in check.
