P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         141


                     COACHING CUE

          I’ve mentioned in this book and in Enhancing Trader Performance how video-
          taping markets can sensitize traders to patterns of supply and demand, aiding
          them in trading decisions. I’ve had traders turn the tables and turn the video-
          recorder on themselves, so that they’re recording themselves as they trade. It’s
          a great tool for self-observation and recognizing your emotional and behavioral
          patterns. After you’ve seen a few of your recurring cycles on tape, you become
          more sensitive to their appearance during real-time trading.




          LESSON 44: ONCE AGAIN, WITH
          FEELING: GET DISTANCE FROM YOUR
          PROBLEM PATTERNS

          Two crucial transitions that occur in psychodynamic work are viewing
          your past patterns as alien to you and experiencing them as your own, per-
          sonal obstacles. Once you’ve become skilled at recognizing your old ways
          and their disruption of your trading, you next step is to distance your-
          self from them. You will not gravitate toward ways of thinking, feeling, and
          acting if these patterns feel alien to you and if you view them as sources
          of pain.
               A term commonly used in psychodynamic writing is ego alien. What
          that means is that some way of viewing the world, experiencing it, or acting
          within it has become foreign to one’s sense of self. When a person starts to
          repeat a pattern that has become ego alien, the resulting thoughts are:

              “This is not the real me.”
              “This is what I used to do; not what I want to be doing.”
              “I’m reacting to the past, not to what’s happening now.”

               Of course, no one consciously owns destructive behavior patterns.
          It is easy, however, to repeat them unthinkingly. When we make those
          patterns ego-alien, we’re not just thinking about them, we’re actively
          rejecting them.
               It’s helpful in this regard to start thinking about the old me and the new
          me. The old me was afraid of failure and equated falling short with losing
          the love and approval of others. The new me realizes that the outcome of
          any single trade will not make me a better or worse human being. The old
          me became angry and frustrated when I couldn’t get my way, because I
          hated feeling out of control. The new me controls my trading through my
