P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                     81

          among retirees: after functioning passively over time, even small efforts be-
          come taxing. Life becomes mechanical; the capacity for intentionality has
          atrophied.
               Just as exercising one muscle group will not develop other ones (or
          building aerobic capacity will not confer muscular strength), cultivating
          one form of intentionality does not necessarily raise our self-directed
          capacities in others. Good examples of this are high-frequency day traders
          who develop an amazing capacity to sustain attention in front of a screen,
          as they track bids and offers, upticks and downticks, through the day.
          These same traders are often unable to sustain the kind of mental effort
          needed to observe themselves over time or systematically review markets
          to identify trends and themes. Clearly, we’re most able to sustain concen-
          tration and effort during activities that interest us and that fit with our skill
          sets. The creative talent who stays in the flow is partly able to achieve this
          state because he sticks to the performance niche we discussed in the last
          chapter: a sphere of talent, skill, and interest. Outside of those niches, the
          sheer effort needed to produce results, the frustrations of not getting those
          results, and the boredom from operating outside our values and interests
          all conspire to interrupt flow and disrupt intention.
               This is the dynamic described in Enhancing Trader Performance: tal-
          ents lead to interests lead to immersion in skill building leads to compe-
          tence leads to further flow and the eventual development of elite perfor-
          mance. It is the interplay between the flow state and the development of
          intentionality that creates accelerated learning curves: without flow, tal-
          ents have no place to go; they never evolve into elite skills.
               Many traders fail to succeed because they are operating outside of the
          niches defined by the intersection of talents, interests, and skills. Because
          they attempt something that doesn’t intrinsically interest them and that
          doesn’t play to their distinctive abilities, they rarely encounter flow states:
          their trading brings little well-being. Without the flow, these traders lack
          the motivational impetus to sustain efforts, and that prevents them from
          cultivating intentionality. Then they wonder why they can’t stick to trading
          plans or why they sabotage themselves with impulsive trades.


              The learning curves of elite performers cultivate intentionality as
              they build skills, which means that—over time—elite performers
              can do more with their skills than others.

               What is the first step in performance development? The most common
          response is practice, and that is important, of course. But before practice,
          there should be play. Play tells us which activities are fun and which are
          not. When we play with something, we discover its joys and frustrations:
          its intrinsic interest for us. Most traders who have not found their niche
