P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          218                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              In exposure work, we intentionally expose ourselves to the situations
          that set us off. Generally, this process begins with imaginal exposure (fac-
          ing situations in realistic imagery) and progresses to in vivo (real time)
          exposure. These exposures pair the trigger situation with learned skills
          that invoke a state incompatible with the bad trading. Thus, in the exam-
          ple above, we might rehearse a calm, focused state of mind while vividly
          imagining the market moving higher against us.
              Think about what this accomplishes. On one hand, we immerse our-
          selves in thoughts and images of something we find threatening. We force
          ourselves to experience our worst fears. At the same time, however, we
          make special efforts to keep ourselves calm and controlled. We talk to our-
          selves in calming ways, slow our breathing, and keep our bodies relaxed.
          We do this again and again, repeating the imagined scenarios until we are
          able to stay completely calm and focused throughout. In that way, we ex-
          tinguish the learned connection between the situation and the fear.

              Exposure methods are ways to reprogram our emotional re-
              sponses to situations.

              Two steps are important to make exposure effective:

           1. Before you try to expose yourself to imagery of your trigger situations,
              make sure you’ve thoroughly learned the coping skill that you’ll be us-
              ing as part of the pairing. For example, you want to practice a deep
              breathing, muscle relaxation routine every day for at least a week to
              ensure that you can focus and relax yourself on demand. At first, prac-
              ticing the technique may take 20 minutes or so to get quite relaxed;
              later it will take only 15, then 10. Eventually, with enough practice,
              you’ll be able to relax and focus yourself quite effectively with just a
              few deep breaths. You want to get to that point before undertaking the
              imagery work. The idea is to internalize the coping skill before you try
              to pair it with threatening situations.
           2. Repetition is the key to effective exposure work. You don’t just imagine
              a stressful situation, keep yourself calm, and then go on with your day.
              Rather, you imagine the situation in great detail, with multiple vari-
              ations. You won’t imagine very stressful situations until you’ve been
              able to keep yourself thoroughly relaxed with less stressful imagined
              scenarios. If that means you repeat a single scenario five times until it
              no longer elicits anxiety, that is fine. The goal is to unlearn the connec-
              tion between the situation and the unwanted response and train your-
              self to a new connection: between the trigger situation and staying in
              the zone.
