P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          214                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                      COACHING CUE

          I mentioned above how chaotic feelings are a trigger for my worst trading. If
          markets aren’t making sense to me, my mind feels scrambled and trading seems
          rushed. I’ve learned through hard experience that a powerful way to create a
          state incompatible with that chaos is to temporarily lower my trading size until
          I regain a feel for markets. With much less at risk, I don’t feel pressured and yet
          can stay actively engaged in markets. When we control our risk we can control
          our emotional reactions to markets: it’s tough to panic when you have little on
          the line. Markets seem to move slower—and our feel for them returns—when
          we’re not distracted by emotions triggered by risk and uncertainty.




          LESSON 67: BUILD ON POSITIVE
          ASSOCIATIONS

          In the cognitive-behavioral framework, we can utilize imagery as a stimulus
          to evoke desired responses, triggering our own positive, learned patterns.
          Making use of imagery in this fashion can help us create positive associa-
          tive links, triggering our best trading behaviors.
               Let’s say we have a trader who anticipates an early-morning entry into
          the market based upon a researched setup. Before the market opens, she
          visualizes the setup and her execution, noting the feelings of satisfaction
          from making a good decision. This positive mental rehearsal acts as a
          preparation for the actual trade, as she follows the behavioral pathway she
          has laid down in advance. I call this anticipatory reinforcement: by imag-
          ining the positive benefits of doing the right things, we strengthen positive
          associative links and make it easier to act on our learning in real time.
               Many traders conduct anticipatory reinforcement in reverse: they
          dwell on negative outcomes and feared scenarios, undercutting their own
          sense of efficacy. This, in essence, is anticipatory punishment, and it leads
          traders to miss opportunities or to not act on them. I’ve found over the
          years that much of what separates the excellent traders from the average
          ones is not so much their ideas, but what they do with those ideas. Two
          traders will have positions go their way and then pull back a bit. The first
          trader, anticipating punishment, fears losing his gain and takes a quick,
          small profit. The second trader, anticipating reward, adds to the position
          on the pull back and reaps large gains. Same idea, different outcomes, all
          as the result of conditioned patterns of thinking.

              Our ways of thinking can reflect conditioned responses; that’s how
              markets can control our minds.
