P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                         11


          is there to teach you something. At the close of today’s trading, create
          a chart with three columns. The first column is a description of the los-
          ing trade you made; the second column will be what you can learn from
          the losing trade; and the third column will be how you will improve your
          trading the next day based on what you learned. What you learned from
          the losing trade might be an insight into the market—perhaps it was range-
          bound when you assumed it was trending. That insight could help you
          frame subsequent trades. Alternatively, what you learn from the losing
          trade might be something about yourself; perhaps an insight into how you
          can manage risk more effectively. Either way, your losing trade is never
          a total loss as long as you embrace it and learn from it.

              Much of self-coaching success is finding the opportunity in
              adversity.

              When you create a trading diary, you bring yourself face to face with
          your worst trading and turn it into opportunity. It doesn’t matter if blem-
          ishes mar your account statement. It’s your account, red marks and all.
          You make yourself stronger when you reach out to your flaws. Embrace
          who you are and you take the first step to becoming the person you are
          capable of being.


                      COACHING CUE

          As we’ll see in the next chapter, the research of James Pennebaker suggests that
          giving voice to stressful events—in a journal or out loud—for at least a half hour
          a day is instrumental in our putting those events into perspective and moving
          beyond them. When you experience a horriﬁc trading day, give it voice. Talk it
          through and sear its lessons in your mind. If you’re in touch with how badly
          your trading makes you feel, you’re least likely to repeat your errors. There can
          be gain in embracing pain.




          LESSON 4: CHANGE YOUR
          ENVIRONMENT, CHANGE YOURSELF

          Human beings adapt to their environments. We draw on a range of skills
          and personality traits to fit into various settings. That is why we can behave
          one way in a social setting and then seem like a totally different human
          being at work. One of the enduring attractions of travel is that it takes us
          out of our native environments and forces us to adapt to new people, new
          cultures, and new ways. When we make those adaptations, we discover
