P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          96                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          different ways of handling trading problems. For this lesson’s exercise, I’d
          like you to think back to several situations in which you’ve handled trading
          problems effectively and several situations in which you’ve handled them
          poorly. Next to each coping strategy, place a checkmark if it’s a mode of
          coping that you utilized when trading well. Then, next to each item on the
          list, place a circle if it’s a mode of coping that you utilized when trading
          poorly. Here we go:
           1. I reached out to others for ideas or feedback            .
           2. I took steps to make sure I didn’t overreact         .
           3. I stepped back from the situation and figured out what to do next             .
           4. I tried to not make a big deal out of the problem            .
           5. I looked for what I could take away from the situation that would help
              me in the future      .
           6. I made a concerted effort to tackle the problem there and then            .
           7. I recognized my mistake and took action         .
           8. I decided to stop trading for a while and regain perspective          .
               Once again, the key is not to figure out the right and wrong coping
          strategies, but rather the ones that have worked best for you—and the ones
          that have been associated with problem patterns in your trading.
               One important dimension of coping is action/reflection. Some people
          benefit most by taking prompt action to own and address challenges; oth-
          ers step back, get themselves under control, put things in perspective,
          think through plans, and/or consult with others. Another key dimension
          is problem-focused versus emotion-focused coping. Some traders respond
          best to situations by first venting and getting things off their chest, reaching
          out to others for input and support, and working actively to dampen neg-
          ative emotions. Other traders fare best by putting feelings aside, analyzing
          situations, and engaging in active problem solving to address problems.
               Often traders run into problems when they fail to enact their best
          coping strategies. The analytical trader can get hurt when he finds him-
          self venting emotion and confronting problems without prior reflection and
          planning. The trader who thrives on social support and feedback from oth-
          ers is unlikely to cope effectively if she becomes discouraged and isolates
          herself from valued peers.

               If you contrast your best and worst coping—the times when you’ve
               handled trading problems most and least effectively—you identify
               what you need to do to sustain a favorable balance between well-
               being and distress.
