P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          106                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r Cognitive Patterns—Meaningful differences in your thought process
              and concentration level during and after your best and worst trades.
            r Physical Patterns—Differences in how you are feeling—your energy
              level, physical tension and relaxation, and posture—when you’re trad-
              ing at your best and worst.
            r Trading Patterns—Differences in the sizing of trades, times of day
              when you’re trading, mode of entering and exiting trades, and instru-
              ments being traded as a function of good versus poor trading.

                     COACHING CUE

          Many times you’ll observe more than one kind of pattern, and many times those
          patterns will be linked. For example, your cognitive patterns may lead to par-
          ticular emotional patterns, which are then linked to speciﬁc trading patterns.
          Think of patterns in sequence—as a kind of positive or negative cascade—not
          as either/or phenomena. Excellent coaches see not only patterns, but also pat-
          terns of patterns. Here are some of the most common patterns among traders
          to watch out for:
            r Placing impulsive, frustrated trades after losing ones.
            r Becoming risk-averse and failing to take good trades after a losing period.
            r Becoming overconﬁdent during a winning period and taking more marginal
              and/or unplanned trades.
            r Becoming anxious about performance and cutting winning trades short.
            r Oversizing trades to make up for prior losses.
            r Ignoring stop-loss levels to avoid taking losses.
            r Working on your trading when you’re losing money, but not when you’re
              making money.
            r Becoming caught up in the market action from moment to moment rather
              than actively managing a trade, preparing for a next trade, or managing a
              portfolio.
            r Beating yourself up after losing trades and losing your motivation for
              trading.
            r Trading for excitement and activity rather than to make money.
            r Taking trades because you’re afraid of missing a market move, rather than
              because of a favorable risk/reward proﬁle for your idea.



          LESSON 33: ESTABLISH COSTS
          AND BENEFITS TO PATTERNS

          A huge step forward for traders who seek to mentor themselves is to know
          the patterns of behavior, thought, and emotion associated with success-
          ful and unsuccessful trading. Still, it is necessary, but not sufficient to
          produce lasting change. This is because knowing a pattern is different
