P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      17

          it particularly deep and slow—and fixing your attention on something that
          captures your attention: music, imagery, or a picture in front of you. If you
          slow your body and take your attention away from the situations that may
          be elevating your emotional temperature, you shift your state and make it
          easier to act calmly, in a planned fashion. With practice, this can be accom-
          plished in a matter of minutes, short-circuiting many disruptive patterns
          before they lead to poor trading decisions.
               The key is to keep yourself aware of your emotional state throughout
          the day. The thermometers are an easy, visually arresting way of becoming
          your own observer—and coach.

                     COACHING CUE

          Check out the insights about breathing in Chapter 9. Mike Bellaﬁore of SMB
          Capital explains how he and partner Steve Spencer teach the traders at their
          prop ﬁrm how to breathe as part of training them to trade. As practitioners of
          meditative disciplines understand, emotional self-control begins with physical
          control.




          LESSON 6: FIND THE RIGHT MIRRORS

          A mirror is an object that shows us our own image. Thanks to mirrors,
          we know what we look like. Far more goes into our self-image, however,
          than our physical reflection. That is because virtually all of our experience
          serves as a psychological mirror. We see ourselves reflected in the impacts
          we have upon the world around us. As a result, much of self-esteem—our
          sense of worth and competence—follows from finding the right mirrors
          in life.
               Let’s start with romantic relationships. When we select the right part-
          ner, we choose someone who knows and values the person we are. That
          love and support is ongoing; consistently reflected to us, it is a deep
          affirmation of self. In a similar fashion, parents constantly mirror a child’s
          identity: “You’re such a good boy!” and “What a smart girl!” Our self-talk is
          born of just such early life conversations: we internalize the voices from
          significant relationships.
               This is why abusive relationships are so damaging. To share life with
          a spouse who attacks or demeans us—or who just doesn’t care—or to en-
          dure parents who are neglectful is to continually face a distorting mirror.
          Over time, children absorb the distorted images and no longer feel lovable,
          secure, and important. Out of such twisted self-images, they select future
          partners that validate their identities, sadly finding others who repeat the
