P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          80                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                As noted earlier, there is an intriguing connection between intention-
          ality and psychological well-being. In studies of flow, Mihalyi Csikszentmi-
          halyi found that these moments of being “in the zone” result from a com-
          plete absorption in one’s activities. It is when we are completely focused on
          what we’re doing that we reach a state in which performance seems almost
          effortless and completely natural. This is a highly pleasurable state and,
          among creative individuals, becomes a psychological reward in its own
          right. In a real sense, the creator’s passion for her work represents a pas-
          sion for the flow state. Exemplary performance thus provides its own re-
          wards: a psychological feedback system that lies at the heart of greatness.
                This helps to explain researcher Dean Keith Simonton’s findings that
          great individuals across a variety of disciplines are unusually productive.
          They have mastered the art of working within their performance zones, so
          that sustained effort becomes a desired end in itself. Their productivity is
          a byproduct of a kind of positive addiction: a pursuit of the high of the
          performance zone for its own sake.
                As Elkonon Goldberg notes in his excellent text The Executive Brain,
          the various facets of intentionality—attention, planning, reasoning—are
          functions of the brain’s frontal cortex. His research also suggests a sur-
          prising degree of plasticity to the brain: utilize brain functions and you
          exercise those brain regions and strengthen their functions, much as go-
          ing to a gym builds our muscles and endurance. At any given point in
          time, we may possess a relatively fixed quantity of intentionality: we can
          only exercise the brain so much before we become fatigued with the ef-
          fort and need to rest. Over time, however, we can build our brain’s ca-
          pacity for intention by exercising those frontal cortex functions. Just as
          lifting weights is the best way to build our strength, engaging in sustained,
          directed effort is the best way to cultivate our intentional capacities.


               When we pursue goals in an effortful manner, we build intention-
               ality and free will.


               One would think that trading should be an excellent form of mind ex-
          ercise for this very reason. That is not necessarily the case, however. We
          can click a mouse and place trades without engaging in effortful, directed
          thought. This is the passive trading described in the previous lesson. When
          we trade without focused intent, we fail to use our mental muscles. At a
          broader level, when we live our lives on autopilot, those muscles atro-
          phy. All of us know individuals who seem to drift from activity to activ-
          ity, seemingly heedless of the longer-term consequences of their actions.
          They spend money and become mired in debt; they jump into relation-
          ships and reenact past conflicts. Gurdjieff described this as a tendency to
          live mechanically, as if we are stimulus-response machines. We see this
