P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          160                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your success, like the feedback that solidified my identity as an author, will
          enable you to literally take your changes to heart.
               Your efforts at self-coaching in the psychodynamic mode will find their
          greatest success if you can disrupt old patterns and enact new ones on a
          daily basis, with the active feedback of those you’re working with. Many
          traders I’ve known have sought to keep their specific trading performance
          secret, obviously embarrassed that they’re not making more money. They
          freely talk about winning days, but remain strangely vague or silent follow-
          ing bad ones. This is exactly the opposite approach to the one that will
          work for you. You want to be visible, warts and all, because that will
          help you—emotionally—put those warts into perspective. If your flaws
          (or your concerns about others’ reactions to those flaws) are so threaten-
          ing that you must hide them, then your defenses control you. When you
          can make yourself completely visible to others, you have nothing to hide.
          Their acceptance of you is complete and genuine, not a false reflection of a
          false self.
               A while ago, when I was posting my trades live to the Web via the
          TraderFeed blog, I invited readers to join me and post their trades as well.
          The daily count of unique visitors at that time was around 2,000; I figured
          that, even if just one-half of 1 percent took me up on the offer, we could
          get 10 different models of trading to learn from. Well, out of 2,000 people,
          only one showed tentative interest. No one was willing to go public with
          his trading.
               That, dear reader, is how losers react. If readers were taking a psycho-
          dynamic approach to change, they would freely share their trades in real
          time and make no effort whatsoever to maintain false selves. Over time,
          their progress would be evident and the massive positive feedback they
          would generate would cement a new identity, a deep sense of security, and
          an emotional fearlessness.


              Accountability provides powerful opportunities to work through
              our greatest insecurities.


               Your challenge for this lesson is to open the kimono and conduct your
          working-through socially, with the feedback of people you respect. This
          would be part of a daily trading plan, ensuring that you’re generating cor-
          rective emotional experiences every single day. Several traders I know
          have taken precisely that approach by starting their own blogs, posting
          their trades, and developing relationships with the traders who responded
          constructively to their ideas. Relationships are a powerful medium for
          change, perhaps the most powerful. If you harness the right relationships
          you will give your self-coaching a reality that transcends simple entries in
          a trading journal.
