P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               221

          influences. Techniques that reinforce the right actions can be useful for the
          pros as well as beginners.
               One trader I worked with was bedeviled with the problem of regret. He
          would enter a longer-term position and, while it was going his way, he was
          fine. As soon as the position retraced some of the gains, however, he began
          to regret that he hadn’t lightened up at the more favorable price levels.
          This regret was a very tangible psychological influence for him. At times, it
          became outright guilt as he convinced himself that he had done the wrong
          thing.
               What happened as a result of this pattern is that he would inevitably
          assuage this guilt by waiting for the profits on the trade to move back to
          their high water mark so that he had an exit approximating the one he
          had missed. The problem was that this cut his original trade idea short.
          Many times he would take his profit on the first rebound from the retrace-
          ment, only to see the position move toward his initial target without him
          on board. Then the trader experienced massive regret and guilt. This led
          him to seek additional home run trades (to relieve his newest guilt), only
          to make the same mistakes on these trades as well. By the time I met with
          this trader, all he could talk about was how much he could have made if he
          had just traded the way he planned.


              Many traders are shaken out of good trades when they aim to not
              lose, rather than aim to maximize profits.

               The exposure work for this trader was straightforward. As the previ-
          ous lesson outlined, we first just worked on the skill of staying calm and
          focused. I used the heart-rate variability (HRV) biofeedback unit for this
          work (www.heartmath.com). He had to concentrate and breathe rhythmi-
          cally and deeply while keeping his HRV readings high. The trader was able
          to use the biofeedback unit for practice at home and he could track his
          skill-building by keeping the majority of his readings in the highest bin for
          a continuous period of five minutes or more. He found that he could keep
          his readings high by focusing his attention (counting in his head), keeping
          physically still and relaxed, and breathing from his diaphragm in a smooth,
          gradual fashion.
               Once he had mastered the skill of keeping himself in the HRV zone,
          he used visualization to walk himself through his trade setup, including his
          profit target and stop. He vividly imagined the market moving in his favor,
          but instead of imagining himself being pleased with this outcome (which
          was what happened in his usual trading), he mentally reviewed his original
          trade plan and told himself that nothing had changed to alter the plan: it
          was working as anticipated. I asked the trader to simply repeat this part
          of the visualization over and over until he no longer reacted to the initial
