P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          8                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               An unfulfilling relationship is one in which we feel invisible. We can
          feel invisible because we’re misunderstood or mistreated. We feel invisible
          when the things that matter most to us find no recognition among others.
          I recall one particularly unfulfilling relationship with a woman. We were
          on the dance floor at a club and I suddenly stopped dancing altogether. She
          didn’t notice at all. She was in her own world. It was a perfect metaphor for
          everything I was experiencing at the time: I was there as a kind of prop, a
          rationale for being on the dance floor. No one was really dancing with me.
          The profound, wrenching emptiness that I felt at that time was a turning
          point; never again would I settle for invisibility.
               In Iggy Pop’s classic song, invisibility is a kind of “Isolation.” But if
          there’s anything worse than being isolated—crying for love—when you’re
          with someone, it’s being isolated from yourself. We are truly lost when
          we’re invisible to ourselves.


              Many traders don’t really know what they do best; they’re invisible
              to themselves.


               All of us have values, dreams, and ideals. How often, however, are
          these explicitly on our minds? To live mired in routine, day in and day
          out, estranged from the things that matter most to us: that’s a form of in-
          visibility. To compromise the things you love in the name of practicality,
          to settle for second best out of fear or convenience: those, too, leave us in
          isolation—from ourselves. Strange as it may seem, we spend much of our
          time invisible to ourselves. The day-to-day part of us dances away, oblivi-
          ous to the other self, the one that thrives on purpose and meaning.
               It’s a real dilemma: How can we possibly coach ourselves to success if
          the very strengths that would bring us success are invisible to us? After all,
          the single best predictor of change is the quality of the helping relationship.
          What, then, is our relationship to ourselves? If we are to be our own trading
          coaches, the success of our efforts rests on our ability to sustain visibility
          and draw on the magic of a fulfilling relationship with ourselves.
               To coach ourselves successfully, we must be visible to ourselves and
          sustain the vision of who we are and what we value. But how can we do
          that? There’s a simple strategy that can build a positive, visible relationship
          with your inner trading coach: identify a single trading strength to express
          as a goal for the coming day’s trading.
               One way I do that when I coach others (and when I work on my
          own trading) is to ask traders to identify what they did best in yester-
          day’s trading that they want to continue today. Set a positive goal, based
          on strengths, to keep you in touch with the best within you. It affirms
          your competencies and keeps these visible, even during challenging mar-
          ket times. Too many of our goals are negative: we declare that we won’t do
