P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          260                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          8: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-eight-links.html
               Jim Dalton’s books are excellent resources when it comes to develop-
          ing a conceptual framework for trading. I recommend Mind Over Markets
          as a first read, then Markets in Profile. Both books are available on the site
          where Jim and Terry Liberman offer training for developing traders:
          www.marketsinprofile.com
               An excellent book on risk and risk management is Kenneth L. Grant’s
          text Trading Risk (Wiley, 2004).
               Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) are an excellent tool for achieving di-
          versification. Two good introductions to ETFs are David H. Fry’s book Cre-
          ate Your Own ETF Hedge Fund (Wiley, 2008) and Richard A. Ferri’s text
          The ETF Book (Wiley, 2008).
               I receive a number of questions regarding seminars, courses, and other
          resources that are offered for sale under the general rubric of trading ed-
          ucation. My impression, and the feedback I get from blog readers, is that
          these offerings are often expensive and of limited relevance to the partic-
          ular strengths and interests of individual traders. Similarly, I receive many
          inquiries into proprietary trading firms, which allow traders to trade the
          firm’s capital in exchange for a share of profits. Some of these firms are
          quite professional and ethical; others are not. I strongly encourage due dili-
          gence: talk to a number of people who have taken these courses or who are
          trading at these firms. If you cannot get direct feedback from actual users
          (not just one or two stooges), move on. Don’t pay thousands of dollars for
          something unless you know exactly what you’re getting.
