P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                     15

          feelings express a psychological reality; asserting a logical reality ignores
          the personal meaning and significance of the situation. Feelings are sur-
          prisingly refractory to willpower: if wanting to feel different—and talking
          ourselves into feeling different—were possible, there would be many fewer
          psychologists in the world.
               If you serve as your own trading coach, a great place to start is
          with the perspective that feelings contain information. Research in cog-
          nitive neuroscience finds that emotion is an essential component of ratio-
          nal decision-making. When the brain is damaged and becomes unable to
          engage in emotional processing, the result is profoundly distorted behav-
          ior. Your coaching goal is not to banish the feelings associated with dif-
          ficult trading—a strategy that only prevents resolution—or to blindly act
          upon them. Rather, the most constructive step you can take to change a
          feeling is to give it full acknowledgment and extract its vital information.


              Feelings inform us about our appraisals of self, others, and world.


               The research of James Pennebaker, a professor at the University of
          Texas, is quite relevant here. He and his colleagues found that writing
          in a journal or talking aloud for a half hour a day had a powerful effect
          on enabling people to cope effectively with challenging emotional circum-
          stances, including traumas and crises. When we make implicit feelings ex-
          plicit, we view them from different angles and place them into a different
          context. For example, someone who has been angry and frustrated with
          himself over poor trading performance might journal about these thoughts
          and feelings at length. As he is writing—and reading over his writings—he
          suddenly realizes, “Whoa; I’m being awfully hard on myself. I’m not that
          bad!” With that, he is able to throttle back his negative self-talk and turn
          his attention back to markets.
               When we fail to acknowledge emotions, we lose their information and
          thus the opportunity to shift perspectives. The frustrated, angry trader who
          brushes aside his tensions and forges blindly ahead finds them easily trig-
          gered the next day. This is particularly the case when the frustrations are
          triggered initially by trading mistakes. I recently met with a trader who
          fought a market trend all morning, built frustration through the day, and
          then blew up in the late afternoon. Had the trader used the frustration to
          examine his trading, he could have ridden the trend and made significant
          money. Brushing emotions aside doesn’t change them. Ironically, acknowl-
          edging and accepting them, giving them free expression, sets the stage for
          transformation.
               Does that mean that we should give full vent to whatever we’re experi-
          encing? No, psychological research also suggests that unbridled expression
