P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          158                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          directly. When you see that you can live through your emotional worst-case
          scenarios and emerge with no lasting damage, that is the corrective emo-
          tional experience.
               Your assignment, then, is to conduct a personal experiment and seek
          just one corrective emotional experience during the trading day. Identify
          the repetitive trading behaviors that most disrupt your trading and then
          figure out what you would be thinking and feeling if you didn’t engage
          in those behaviors. When a situation arises in which you would normally
          repeat your pattern, make the effort to hold off and experience those feel-
          ings you identified. See what those feelings are like, see how you cope with
          them, and see how the new coping affects your trading. You may be sur-
          prised to find that facing your fears is the best way of moving past them.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you have a trading mentor, someone you respect and admire, try trading like
          that person just for one day. Do everything as you think they would do it. See
          how you feel with the discrepant experience, as the enactment forces you to
          forego your own negative patterns. In enacting an ideal pattern, you create new
          experiences with markets that undercut old, repetitive patterns.




          LESSON 50: WORKING THROUGH

          The term “working through” has a specific meaning in psychodynamic
          work. Once you have made initial changes—breaking old patterns of de-
          fense, facing challenging emotional conflicts, and finding new ways of
          dealing with those—the working-through process involves extending these
          gains by repeating the process across a variety of situations. As we’ve seen,
          repetition combats relapse: working a problem through a number of rela-
          tionship situations cements new, mature ways of handling core conflicts.
              A classic example is the trader who avoids closeness in relationships
          out of fear of rejection. Sure enough, in his relationship with his counselor,
          he transfers his past fears to the present relationship and avoids intimate
          topics. While this provides a superficial sense of safety, it prevents the
          trader from talking about what is truly important—and moving beyond it.
          Once the trader makes a conscious effort to open up in the sessions, the
          counselor provides the discrepant response by not being rejecting. This
          makes it easier over time to break the pattern with the counselor in future
          sessions and remain open.
              In the working-through process, the trader in our example would take
          the progress with the counselor and now apply it to other relationships, as
