P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          102                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          to be onerous. One of the best ways to sabotage self-monitoring efforts is
          to make them so burdensome that you won’t sustain the effort. If you’re
          an active trader and cannot automate your monitoring of trades, you can
          streamline the journal in one of several ways:

            r You can create a single entry for the morning trading and a second
              entry for the afternoon’s trading, with the columns simply summariz-
              ing your positions, your P/L for the A . M . or P . M ., and your associated
              observations of your trading at those times.
            r You can create entries for selected positions only that stand out in
              your mind either because they were quite successful or quite unsuc-
              cessful. If you sample from your trades in this manner, make sure
              that you include best and worst trades, so that you can observe pos-
              itive and negative patterns. These are the trades from which we learn
              the most.
            r If your trading is complex, with many positions, hedges, and a flowing
              in and out of risk exposure over time (like a market maker or a very
              active portfolio manager), you can simply summarize your day with a
              single journal entry. The first column would review your major trading
              ideas, the second column would note P/L, and the third column would
              include your self-observations.


               There is no single self-monitoring format perfect for all traders; the
          key is to adapt the format to your needs and trading style. The real work
          comes when you’ve accumulated enough entries to notice patterns in your
          trading: the factors that distinguish your best trades and days and those
          that accompany your worst trading. How to analyze your self-monitoring
          journal will be the focus of the next lesson. For now, however, your task
          is simply to sustain self-awareness: to be an active observer of your own
          trading process.
               When you are your own trading coach, there is always a part of you that
          stands apart from your decision-making and execution, observing yourself
          and exercising control over what you do and how you do it. The real value
          of the trading journal is that it structures the process of self-awareness and
          helps make it more regular and automatic. If you were walking on a familiar
          street, you would hardly think about how you walk, everything would be
          on autopilot. If, however, you were taking the same walk in a minefield,
          you would be exquisitely self-aware, conscious of every step that you took.
          Trading is neither a walk in the park nor a minefield . . . perhaps it’s more
          like a walk in a beautiful, but somewhat dangerous park. You want to be
          absorbed in the walk, but alert and aware at the same time. That is the
          function of the trading journal: it enables you to monitor yourself, even as
          you are immersed in what you’re doing.
