P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           289


               The key word Jeff uses is know. Many traders don’t know their edge;
          they don’t know how well their methods work in different market condi-
          tions. They have beliefs, but not deeply held convictions about the ways in
          which they make decisions. As a result, traders lose discipline. This loss is
          not because they cannot follow rules. It’s because they don’t deeply believe
          in the rules to begin with.


              Many times, poor discipline is the result of shallow conviction. If
              we don’t truly know our edge, how can we believe in it?


               A second important element for Jeff Miller’s self-coaching is analysis
          and review. “Having a system means testing it properly,” he explains. “This
          is not back-fitting for a short time period. It is developing the method in one
          era and testing over out-of-sample data covering different markets. Only
          then can you be confident. Even with this method, you must do regular
          performance reviews to make sure that something in the world has not
          changed. There may be a tough decision about whether you are in a pre-
          dictable slack period or circumstances that are really different.” In other
          words, trading is fraught with uncertainty; even the best ideas have a lim-
          ited shelf life. The purpose of analysis and review is to generate an edge,
          but also to monitor changes in that edge over time. It’s not as simple as
          finding systems that make money for all time and all markets.
               Jeff’s third area of self-coaching is learning to recognize exceptions.
          “Understanding your method means knowing when something truly excep-
          tional is happening,” he points out. “We all know the danger in saying that,
          ‘This time is different.’ Keeping this in mind, there are exceptional trading
          opportunities lasting a day or a week, even for those of us with longer time
          horizons.” This thought gets us back to the excellent point raised by Henry
          Carstens: knowing when to turn your trading off. When markets are be-
          having in historically abnormal ways, the usual methods may not produce
          their usual results. Exceptional markets yield exceptional risks as well as
          rewards.
               The takeaway from Rob and Jeff is the value of self-knowledge. The
          more you know about your trading methods, the more you can play to
          their strengths and avoid their weaknesses. Note that for both Rob and
          Jeff, this has meant considerable time and effort outside of trading hours
          to hone their edges and stay on top of how they change. I consistently find
          that a major predictor of trading success is the amount of time devoted to
          markets outside of trading hours proper. The time spent in defining and
          refining trading methods is a major part of this commitment. When you are
          your own trading coach, you are no different from a basketball or football
