P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                           61


          B, or C. A trades are clearly within your sweet spot; they’re your bread-and-
          butter, best trades. B trades are your good trades: not necessarily gimmes
          or home runs, but consistent winners. C trades are more marginal and
          speculative: they’re the ones that feel right, but are clearly outside your
          wheelhouse.
              Over time, you can track the profitability of the A, B, and C trades and
          verify that you really know your niche. You can also track the relative sizing
          of your positions, to ensure that you’re pursuing the greatest reward when
          you take trades in your sweet spots and assuming the least risk when you’re
          going after that low, outside pitch.
              The more clearly you identify your niche, the less likely you are to get
          away from it. That clarity can only benefit your profitability and emotional
          experience over time.

                      COACHING CUE

          If you categorize your trades/time frames/setups/markets as A, B, or C as out-
          lined above, you have the start for good risk management when you go into
          slumps. When markets do not behave as you expect and you lose your edge,
          cut your trading back to A trades only. Many times, slumps start with overconﬁ-
          dence and getting outside our niches. If it’s the A trades that aren’t performing,
          that’s when you know you have to cut your risk (size) and reassess markets and
          trends.



          LESSON 20: VOLATILITY OF MARKETS
          AND VOLATILITY OF MOOD

          I recently posted something important to the TraderFeed blog. I took
          two months in the S&P emini futures (ES) market—January and May,
          2008—and compared the median volatility of half-hour periods within the
          months. During that period, overall market volatility, as gauged by the VIX,
          had declined significantly. The question is whether this day-to-day volatility
          also translated to lower volatility for very short time frame traders.
               The results were eye-opening: In January, when the VIX was high, the
          median 30-minute high-low price range was 0.60 percent. In May, with a
          lower VIX, the range dwindled to 0.28 percent. In other words, markets
          were moving half as far for the active day trader in May than January.
               Let’s think about how that affects traders emotionally. The trader
          whose perceptions are anchored in January and who anticipates much
          greater movement in May will place profit targets relatively far away. In
          the lower volatility environment, the market will not reach those targets
          in the time frame that is traded. Instead, trades that initially move in the
          trader’s favor will reverse and fall well short of expectations. Repeat that
