P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          122                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          think about change in a very conscious manner. Only late in the process do
          the new behaviors come more naturally and automatically.


              In every change process, there is an intermediate phase in which
              old problem patterns coexist with new, positive ones. Relapse at
              this stage is the norm—not necessarily a sign of failure.


               So what enables us to make the transition from effortful change to an
          internalization of new patterns so thorough that those patterns become
          second nature? If you think back to when you learned to drive a car, there
          was a period when you had to consciously focus on every aspect of driv-
          ing, from signaling and making turns to changing lanes. Only with repeated
          experience did these activities become automatic, freeing you up to fo-
          cus on road conditions when necessary, converse with passengers, and lo-
          cate unfamiliar destinations. Similarly, repeated experience with new cog-
          nitive, emotional, and behavioral patterns in trading is what cements these
          patterns and frees you up to focus on markets. Relapse is overcome
          through repetition.


              Only when new behaviors have been repeated many times, in many
              contexts, do they begin to become automatic, overcoming the ten-
              dency to relapse.


               We saw in the lesson dealing with goal setting that, as your own trading
          coach, you don’t want to set a goal one day, another goal the next day,
          and still a different one later that week. This is a common flaw with many
          trading journals. Traders take steps to initiate change—phases three and
          four above—but fail to cement the changes through repeated experience.
          It is far better to focus on one or two changes and institute those with
          regularity over a period of weeks and months than to try to make many
          changes in a short period of time.
               Your assignment, following the discussion of rules from the previous
          chapter, is to review your current trading goals and assess how well you
          sustain work on them day after day. Ideally your goals—and the changes
          you attempt to make—should be expressed in such a manner that you will
          necessarily have to work on them each and every trading day. One way to
          foster this consistency is to generate a daily report card, in which you grade
          yourself on your enactment of the behaviors you try to cultivate. The goal
          is to achieve good grades each day, not just hit your targets on a particular
          occasion.
