P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      145

          track of results. The only question is the degree to which this self-coaching
          is purposeful, guided, and constructive. From a psychodynamic perspec-
          tive, your self-coaching is no different from a relationship with a profes-
          sional coach: the dynamics of that relationship will serve as a mirror, and
          you’ll tend to internalize what is reflected.


              Our self-talk is our self-coaching.


               What this means is that how you focus on your problem patterns from
          the past is crucial to the success of your self-coaching. You are going to
          fall back into old patterns sometimes; you are going to miss opportunities
          to enact new, positive patterns. There will be occasions in which you work
          hard to avoid one pattern, only to fall into another one. All of these situa-
          tions can be discouraging and frustrating. Yet, as your own coach, you are
          tasked with the responsibility of maintaining a constructive relationship
          with you, your student.
               “Comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable,” is the way I de-
          scribed my approach to working with people in The Psychology of Trading.
          It’s not a bad formulation for coaching oneself. When you’re afflicted—
          suffering, hurting, losing—you want to be your own best support. When
          you’re winning, you want to be afflicting yourself by doubling down on
          your discipline, alert to any overconfidence that might allow old habits to
          reenter your trade.
               A great exercise is to cull through your trading journal and examine
          the emotional tone of your writings. Do they sound like positive coaching
          communications, or are they negative, frustrated, and blaming? Do they
          place equal emphasis on your progress and achievements, or do they harp
          on what you didn’t do right?
               The worst thing you can do as a trading coach is reenact old personal
          patterns by adopting the voice of a past figure who was part of the de-
          structive cyclical conflicts that you’re trying to move beyond. If you had a
          parent who was hostile and critical, one who couldn’t be pleased; if you
          had a spouse who could not acknowledge your achievements or a resent-
          ful sibling, you don’t want to replay their voices in your own self-coaching.
          How you treat yourself may well be part of the very pattern you’re trying to
          change: working on your coaching voice is a great way to move that work
          forward.


              Perfectionism is often a hostile, rejecting set of self-communica-
              tions that masquerades as a drive for achievement.
