P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      157

          those fears and acknowledge them, the challenge is to channel the fear in
          a way that does not derail your trading plan. You could talk with a trading
          colleague to gain some perspective, perform some exercises to calm
          yourself down and reassure yourself, or use the opportunity to write in
          your journal and remain an observer to the anxiety rather than the one
          immersed in it.
               By refusing to act on the old defensive pattern, you guarantee your-
          self a psychologically helpful outcome. This is very important. As long as
          your position is sized properly with appropriate risk/reward in the place-
          ment of stops and targets, one of two things will happen: you’ll either
          hit your target and make your money or you’ll get stopped out at your
          predetermined level.
               While the latter scenario is less desirable than the first, neither sce-
          nario is catastrophic. By acting in a manner that is discrepant from your old
          pattern, you have created a win-win: either you make money, or you find
          out—in your own experience—that the loss was not so bad after all and
          nothing to fear. In some ways, it’s this latter experience that is the most
          helpful. By facing your worst-case scenario and seeing that it’s something
          you can, indeed, cope with, you generate a tremendous sense of confidence
          and mastery.


              Trading well is a powerful source of new, positive emotional
              experiences.


               There are many ways of constructing discrepant experiences. One is
          to surround yourself with people who respond differently to you than
          those from your past and let them be a part of the changes you’re work-
          ing on. They can then support you in not repeating old patterns, but also in
          providing positive feedback when you enact new, positive ones. Another
          way to generate discrepancy is to face uncomfortable situations directly,
          refusing to engage in old defensive maneuvers. Once you get in touch with
          the feelings you’ve been holding at bay, you’ll be surprised at how readily
          you can arrive at ways of coping with them that provide you with the new,
          constructive endings.
               A term used by psychodynamic therapists Alexander and French
          captures the essence of this approach: corrective emotional experience.
          What enables people to overcome their problem patterns is a set of
          emotional experiences that correct the learning that occurred during times
          of past conflict. It’s not enough to perceive a problem and think about
          it; as your own trading coach, you need to create experiences that en-
          able you to move past that problem. Invariably this means refusing to keep
          difficult feelings buried and, instead, experience them fully and face them
