P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          172                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          certain market junctures, helping a trader size positions appropriately and
          limit losses on trades. Where the schema introduces distorted perception,
          however, is in defining danger as any drop from an equity peak, not as an
          outright loss of capital. This makes it particularly difficult to stay in win-
          ning trades, because relatively small retracements will stimulate desires
          for profit taking. A more realistic perspective would define danger not only
          in terms of lost paper profits, but also in terms of lost opportunity. Some
          of my worst trades have been ones in which I acted on a short-term per-
          spective and subsequently missed the longer-term market move. The need
          to avoid danger exposed me to the equal danger of cutting profits short.
               Notice that these worst trading episodes cut across patterns of think-
          ing, feeling, and behaving. Once we start from the (faulty) premise, “You
          must avoid risk,” and once we define risk as any market movement
          against our positions, we shape our feelings and actions accordingly.
          Reviewing your worst trades may be painful, but it is also liberating. It tells
          you where your mind has gone astray, and that can lead you to corrective
          action.


                     COACHING CUE

          Many of our worst trades come from the demands we place on ourselves. Keep
          tabs of the times you tell yourself that you need to, must, and have to par-
          ticipate in market moves or make money. When these demands become rigid
          absolutes, we end up chasing market moves, refusing to take small losses, and
          otherwise violating principles of good trading. When we are more focused on
          those internal demands than on our trading rules, that’s when we’re most likely
          to lose money. You’ll be able to identify those demands by the internal feel-
          ing of pressure that they generate. There’s a diﬀerent feeling when you trade
          from opportunity versus trade from pressure. Track your worst trades and the
          feelings associated with them to alert you to the ways in which your automatic
          thoughts can sabotage your best trading.




          LESSON 54: USE A JOURNAL
          TO RESTRUCTURE OUR THINKING

          Review your past emotional episodes and trading mistakes as a helpful way
          to identify your mental maps and the ways in which they can distort your
          perception. The goal of cognitive work, however, is to be able to catch
          your automatic thoughts—those bouts of stinkin’ thinkin’—as they are oc-
          curring so that they cannot hijack your mind and your trading.
