P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                   217

          concrete response that embodies good trading. In this way, you plan your
          trading as well as your trades, but you also strengthen the bonds of positive
          learned patterns and extinguish the negative patterns. As your own trading
          coach, you have the power to be teacher as well as student: the shaper of
          behavior as well as the one whose behavior is shaped. If you take the active
          learning role that lies at the heart of the behavioral approach, you become
          the programmer of your own patterns.

                      COACHING CUE

          I ﬁnd it helpful to help traders identify the highlights of their trading from the
          past week: what they did especially well. From these highlights, we frame ideas
          about what the trader is really good at—what makes her successful. We then use
          this what I’m good at idea to frame positive goals for the coming week: how
          the trader is going to enact those strengths in the next few days. Because these
          are goals we track together, we create a situation of anticipatory reinforcement
          and a momentum for continuing best practices. This is a process you can carry
          forward with trading colleagues: share what you do best and how you put your
          best talents and skills into practice. Focus on your best trading and you begin
          the process of extinguishing your worst practices.



          LESSON 68: EXPOSURE: A POWERFUL
          AND FLEXIBLE BEHAVIORAL METHOD

          If I had to name a single behavioral method that is of greatest value to
          traders, it would be exposure. As I described in my chapter on behavioral
          methods in the Enhancing Trader Performance book, exposure is a tech-
          nique that enables you to reprogram those stimulus-response triggers that
          set off faulty trading.
               A major idea underlying exposure is that the avoidance of negative
          experience itself becomes a reinforcer, preventing people from overcom-
          ing learned fears. Let’s say, for instance, that I have taken large losses
          on a short position and now experience fear whenever a buy program
          hits the tape and moves the index higher by several ticks. I can avoid
          that fear by simply exiting the position. While that avoidance is a relief, it
          never addresses the learned connection impelling my behavior. Indeed, it
          reinforces my fear by acting on it. It is impossible to overcome a fear when
          you give into it.

              We overcome fear by facing it successfully.
