P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     15:45    Printer: Yet to come




          xiv                                                                      PREFACE



          text. Despite the allure and convenience of electronic publishing, few
          traders I consulted actually sought out or used e-books. The most common
          complaint among traders was that they did not want to spend hours de-
          vouring information in front of a screen after a full day of trading. I quickly
          realized that participants in the financial markets don’t use the electronic
          medium in the same way that they engage print text. That led me to think
          about writing a different kind of book, one better suited to publishing’s
          electronic frontier, but also useable in print.
               When you overlay these two observations, you can appreciate the vi-
          sion that led to this text: a “trading coach in a book” that can be as easily
          read on the screen as on paper. The goal was to integrate blog and book
          content by creating practical “lessons” that help traders become their own
          trading coaches. There are 101 lessons in The Daily Trading Coach, aver-
          aging several pages in length. Each lesson follows a general format, iden-
          tifying a trading challenge, an approach to meeting that challenge, and a
          specific suggestion or assignment for working on the issue. The chapters
          are independent of one another: you can read them in order, or you can use
          the table of contents or index to read, each day, the lesson that most ap-
          plies to your current trading. Unlike a traditional book, the idea is not to
          read it through from front to back in a few sittings. Rather, you take one
          lesson at a time and apply it to guide your development as a trader. Like
          the blog, it’s an on-screen reminder of what to do when you’re at your best,
          but—more than the blog—it’s also a roadmap (and practical set of insights
          and tools) for discovering and implementing the best within you.
               My ambition has been to pack into these 101 lessons more useable in-
          formation and practical methods than might be found in any number of
          expensive seminars and coaching sessions, at far less expense. Too often,
          the goal of the seminar providers and coaches is to convert you into ongo-
          ing clients. The intent of this book is just the opposite: to give you the tools
          to become your own coach, so that you can guide your own professional
          and personal growth. In other words, this is a manual of psychoeducation:
          a how-to guide for improving yourself and your performance.
               One thing I particularly like about the electronic format is that it en-
          ables a writer to link the book content to a vast array of material on the
          Web. I will be adding material to The Daily Trading Coach via a dedicated
          blog called Become Your Own Trading Coach (www.becomeyourown
          tradingcoach.blogspot.com), so that this book will grow over time. You
          will need only to click the e-book links to access free updated information
          and methods on the Become Your Own Trading Coach site. There is one
          master page on the blog for each chapter of this book containing the links
          relevant to that chapter’s material. At the end of each chapter, there is also
          a resource page that alerts readers to further links and readings. I will be
          adding audio and video content to the new blog over time, which should be
