P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008    9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                       59

              price swings. Time frame affects risk, and it determines the nature of
              the trader’s interaction with markets.
            r A Framework for Decision-Making. Some traders are purely dis-
              cretionary and intuitive in their decision-making, processing market
              information as it unfolds. Other traders rely on considerable prior anal-
              ysis before making decisions. There are traders who are structured in
              their trading, relying on explicit models—sometimes purely mechani-
              cal systems. Other traders may follow general rules, but do not formu-
              late these as hard-and-fast guidelines. My own trading is a combination
              of head and gut: I research and plan my ideas, but execute and manage
              them in a discretionary fashion. Each trader blends the analytical and
              the intuitive differently.

              What you trade and how you trade should be an expression of your
              distinctive cognitive style and strengths.

               My experience working with traders—and my own experience in the
          school of hard trading knocks—is that much of the distress they experi-
          ence occurs when they are operating outside their niche. Ted Williams, the
          Hall of Fame baseball slugger, offers a worthwhile metaphor. He divided
          the plate into a large number of zones and calculated his batting average
          for each zone. He found, for instance, that pitches low and away provided
          him with his lowest batting average. Other pitches, those high and directly
          over the plate, provided sweet spots where his average was quite high. With
          certain pitches, Williams was a mediocre hitter. With others, he was a su-
          perstar. The source of his greatness, by his own account, was that he
          learned to see the plate well and wait for his pitches.
               A trader’s niche defines his sweet spots. Certain markets I trade well,
          others I don’t. Certain times of day I trade well; others fall short of
          breakeven. If I extend or reduce my typical time frame, my performance
          suffers. If I trade patterns outside my research, I suffer. Like Williams, I
          trade well when I wait for my pitches. If I swing at the low and away balls,
          I strike out.

              One theme that emerges from the experienced traders in Chapter
              9 is that they know which pitches they hit, and they’ve learned the
              value of waiting for those pitches.

              The implication is clear: Our emotional experience reflects the degree
          to which we’re consistently operating within our niche. That is true in ca-
          reers, relationships, and in trading. When there is an excellent fit between
          our needs, interests, and values and the environment that we’re operating
