P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                            249



              You don’t need to have a large edge to run a successful trading
              business; you do need to have a consistent edge.


                Had we tracked results every single day, we would have found that
          Trader A had some winning days and Trader B had some losers. Over a
          series of 100 days, however, the edge manifests itself boldly. There are no
          scenarios in which Trader A is profitable and none where Trader B loses
          money. Just as the edge per bet in a casino leads to reliable earnings for
          the house over time, the edge per trade can create a reliable profit stream
          when sustained over the long run. Once you have your edge, your great-
          est challenge as your own trading coach is to ensure your consistency in
          exploiting that edge, every day, every trade.
                But let’s take the analysis a step further and explore risk and re-
          ward. Our Traders A and B are not great risk takers: they are only trading
          one ES contract for their $20,000 account. This provides them with aver-
          age daily volatility of returns approximating 50 basis points, which is not
          so unusual in the money management world. We can see, however, that
          the 3 percent return for Trader B over 100 days would amount to about
          7.5 percent per year (250 trading days). While that’s not a terrible return,
          it is before commissions and other expenses are deducted. The consistent
          small edge does not produce a large return when risk-taking is modest.
                So how could our Trader B juice his returns? A simple way would
          be to trade 3 contracts instead of 1. Assuming that this does not change
          how Trader B trades, the average daily variability of returns would now be
          1.5 percent, with an average win size of $300. The return of over 20 percent
          per year would now look superior. If you take more risk when you have
          a consistent edge, this certainly makes sense, just as betting more makes
          sense at a casino makes sense if the odds are in your favor. You simply
          need to have deep enough pockets to weather series of losses that are ex-
          pectable even when you do have the edge. When I ran the scenarios for
          Trader B, peak to trough drawdowns of $700 to $800 were evident. Multiply
          that by the factor of 3 and now Trader B incurs drawdowns of 12 percent.
                But what if Trader B took pedal to the metal and traded 10 contracts
          with a small edge? The potential annual return of 75 percent looks fantas-
          tic. The potential drawdowns of more than 40 percent now seem onerous.
          That small, consistent edge suddenly generates large losses when risk is
          ramped to an extreme.


              The variability of your returns will tend to be correlated with the
              variability of your emotions.
