P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          304                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



           1. Hour of day analysis. “Because markets trade differently through-
              out the day,” David explains, “many of our users measure their perfor-
              mance (in terms of average P/L, risk taken, profit opportunity, number
              of winners/losers, size of winners/losers) by the time of day the trade
              occurred. This helps them to use their past performance to determine
              the most ideal times for them to trade a given market.”
           2. Winning trades versus losing trades. “In looking for differences in
              winning and losing trades, it’s helpful—and necessary—to group all
              winners together and group all losers together and then apply metrics
              to each category,” David points out. “The value in doing so is the oppor-
              tunity for you to discover the differences in your winning trades and
              your losing trades.” Among the metrics applied to both the winning
              and losing trades are the number of winners and losers; the average
              win and average loss size; the number of times a trader added to win-
              ning and losing positions; the average amount of heat taken in a trade
              before it was covered for a profit or loss; and the average time it has
              taken to hit the point of maximum heat. The latter is an especially in-
              teresting metric in that, by comparing winning and losing trades, it can
              help guide traders to formulate rules for the proper amount of time to
              be holding positions.


              If you know how much heat you take on winners versus losers and
              how long it takes you to reach that point of maximum heat, you
              can set guidelines for when and where it might be prudent to cut
              your losers.


           3. Comparing results among market/product traded. “Traders that
              trade more than one market/product sometimes have difficulty inter-
              preting how their performance compares in their trading of each mar-
              ket,” David Adler observes. “Oftentimes the trader will be very prof-
              itable in one market but have consistently less profit or even losses in
              other markets. If you trade more than one market, it’s important to split
              up any analysis or performance reporting that you do by the markets
              you trade.” Among the metrics he applies to different markets are: the
              total amount earned/lost per market; the average win and average loss
              for each market; the number of consecutive winning and losing trades
              for each market; the average risk incurred among trades for each mar-
              ket; the average lost profit opportunity for each market; the number
              of times you added to losing and winning positions per market; the
              average amount of time spent in losing trades per market; the maxi-
              mum losing and winning trades per market; and breakdowns by hour
              of the day for each market. My experience with metrics is that these
