P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008     9:59   Printer: Yet to come




          58                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          developing, and it keeps you in the positive mindset that best sustains your
          development. Every setback has a purpose, and that’s to help you learn: to
          make you stronger. Performance anxiety melts away as soon as it’s okay
          to mess up.


          LESSON 19: SQUARE PEGS AND
          ROUND HOLES

          One of the central concepts of Enhancing Trader Performance is that
          each trader can maximize his development and profitability by discover-
          ing a niche and operating primarily within it. A trading niche has several
          components:

            r Specific Market and/or Asset Classes. Markets behave differently
              and are structured differently. Some markets are more volatile; some
              are more mature and offer more market depth; some offer more infor-
              mation than others. The personality of the market must fit with the
              personality of the trader. Someone like myself, who thrives on data
              collection and the analysis of historical patterns of volume and senti-
              ment, can do quite well in the information-rich stock market; not so
              well in cash currencies, where volume and moment-to-moment senti-
              ment shifts are more opaque.
            r A Core Strategy. The trader’s core strategy or strategies capture her
              ways of making sense of supply and demand. Some traders gravitate
              toward trend trading; others are contrarian and more countertrend in
              orientation. Some traders rely mostly on directional trade; others on
              relational trades that express relative value, such as spreads and pairs
              trades. Some traders are highly visual and make use of charts and tech-
              nical patterns; others are more statistically oriented and model-driven.
            r A Time Frame. The scalper, who processes information rapidly and
              holds positions for a few minutes, is different from the intraday posi-
              tion trader and even more different from the swing trader who holds
              positions overnight. A portfolio manager who trades multiple ideas and
              markets simultaneously engages in different thought processes from
              the market maker in a single instrument. Your time frame determines
              what you look at: market makers will pay great attention to order flow;
              portfolio managers may focus on macroeconomic fundamentals. Time
              frame also determines the speed of decision-making and the relative
              balance between time spent managing trades and time spent research-
              ing them. My personality tends to be risk-averse: I trade selectively
              over a short time frame. I know many other, more aggressive traders
              who trade frequently and others who hold for longer periods and larger
