P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          335

          unique elements are hard to find. Very high or low volume; strong or weak
          put/call ratios; large opening gaps—all are good areas for investigations.


              We find the greatest directional edges following extreme market
              events.

               Once you have identified a pattern that stands out, this becomes a hy-
          pothesis that you entertain to start a trading day or week. If, say, I find that
          40 of the last 50 occasions in which the market has been very weak with
          a high put/call ratio have shown higher prices 20 days later, this will have
          me looking for a near-term bottoming process. If, after that analysis, I no-
          tice that we’re making lower price lows but with fewer stocks and sectors
          participating in the weakness, this may add a measure of weight to my hy-
          pothesis. Eventually, I might get to the point where I think we’ve put in a
          price bottom and I’ll buy the market, giving myself a favorable risk/reward
          should the historical pattern play out.
               But equally important, consider the scenario in which we see good his-
          torical odds of bouncing over a 20-day period, leading us to search for
          a near-term bottoming process. My fresh data, however, suggest that the
          market is weakening further: more stocks and sectors are making lows,
          not fewer. The historical pattern does not appear to be playing itself out.
          This, too, is very useful data. When markets buck their historical tenden-
          cies, something special may be at work. Some very good trades can pro-
          ceed from the recognition that markets are not behaving normally.
               This is the value of considering patterns as hypotheses and keeping
          your mind open to those hypotheses being supported or not. A historical
          pattern in markets is a kind of script for the market to follow; your job is
          to determine whether or not it’s following that script.


              Our analyses only inform us of historical tendencies. If a market
              is not behaving in a manner that is consistent with its history, this
              alerts us to unique, situational forces at work.


              All of this suggests that historical investigations are useful logical aids,
          but my experience is that their greatest value may be psychological. Day
          after day, week after week, and year after year of investigating patterns
          and running market results through Excel have given me a unique feel for
          patterns. It also has given me a keen sense for when patterns are changing:
          when historical precedents may no longer hold.
              One routine that has been very helpful has been to isolate the last five
          or so instances of a potential pattern. If the market has behaved quite
