P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           299


              Trading in a Good Environment
              “In order for me to be able to coach myself,” Larry explains, “I need
              to trade in an environment that is conducive for success. We built our
              firm with that in mind. All the traders at my firm are on the same page.
              Willingness to be a part of a team combined with the desire to learn
              are characteristics each trader possesses.” I have visited many firms
              in which traders operate in almost total isolation of one another. One
              person’s learning experiences become just that: opportunities to learn
              for that individual alone. When a firm is founded upon a team con-
              cept, everyone’s learning becomes learning for the group. This is Larry
              Fisher’s central insight, and it is the greatest strength of his firm. When
              everyone calls out her trades, there’s no place to hide. That is tremen-
              dously freeing. You can learn from the successes of your peers and
              also from their mistakes. Their ideas spark yours, and your heads-up
              on news or breakouts aids everyone else. In an environment in which
              all traders are their own coaches, all traders inevitably contribute to
              each other’s coaching.


              Learning cannot occur without accountability.


               These are the real words of real traders who really trade for a living
          and really run successful trading firms. Their best practices can become
          your own, even if you don’t work for SMB Capital or Trading RM. How do
          your trading practices compare with those at these firms? How does your
          trading atmosphere compare with theirs? When you’re coaching yourself,
          you are—in a sense—creating your own trading firm. You are coach, risk
          manager, researcher, and trader rolled into one. How well you fulfill these
          roles depends on the time and effort you devote to each. A world-class bas-
          ketball player works on offense and defense; on passing, dribbling, shoot-
          ing, rebounding, and physical conditioning. There are many facets to one’s
          game—in sports and in trading. The successful firms pay attention to all
          of them.
               Mike and his partner Steve are correct to emphasize breathing in their
          training of traders. This exercise makes a worthwhile assignment for your
          development. The first step toward controlling emotional and cognitive
          arousal is controlling the level of arousal in the body. When we are filled
          with stresses and worries, we bring those to markets. When we sustain a
          quiet mind, we let markets come to us and free our minds to respond to
          the patterns we perceive. Write in journals, communicate with peers, and
          consult your trading statistics. These actions are all ways to make sense of
          your market experience so that you can then sit in front of the screen with
