P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      19


              One of the best means for creating positive mirrors is the structured
          pursuit of goals. When we create challenging, meaningful, and doable
          goals, we generate potential experiences of mastery and success. When we
          make goal setting an ongoing feature of our self-coaching means, we con-
          tinually construct opportunities for powerful, self-affirming emotional
          experiences. We know from psychological research that such emotional
          episodes are processed more deeply and enduringly than normal, daily ex-
          perience. A good therapist creates vivid experiences that challenge clients’
          old patterns; similarly, a good coach generates emotionally powerful and
          positive mirroring experiences for traders.


              Your goals should set yourself up for success and a building of
              confidence.

               So here is your assignment: Each day this week your trading
          journal should include a specific goal for work that particular trading
          session, concrete actions that you will take to achieve that goal, and a self-
          evaluation at the end of trading to gauge your success in reaching that goal.
          The goal should be a trading process that you wish to improve (i.e., some-
          thing you have control over), not a profit target (which you ultimately
          don’t control). For example, your goal might be to increase your trading
          size incrementally, to implement a strategy for exiting trades in stages, or
          to limit trades to setups that align with the larger market trend. At the end
          of the day, you will give yourself a report card based solely on how well you
          achieved the goals you set for the day. These report cards can be displayed
          beside your monitor to reinforce your performance and progress. If you
          fail to achieve a good grade, improvement on that activity becomes your
          goal for the next day. If you receive a fine report card, you generate fresh
          goals for the next session. The idea is to never trade without consciously
          working on some aspect of your trading.


              It is not enough to set goals; you need ways of tracking your
              progress toward those goals and feeding that information into fu-
              ture goals.


               Many traders only engage in such goal setting when they’re trad-
          ing poorly or losing money. The idea, however, is to make self-coaching
          and self-improvement an ongoing part of your trading career. Why? Be-
          cause it’s not just about making money, it’s about creating the experiences
          that will sustain your sense of competence and confidence. Think of a
          young child: you don’t offer positive feedback only when the child is hurt-
          ing. Rather, your support and love are continuous, enabling the child to
