P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          152                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          This shift often leads to new insights and new inspirations for dealing with
          difficult conflicts.

              When you feel in new ways, you often see in new ways as well.

               This emotional work can be conducted effectively through guided im-
          agery. If you vividly imagine a market situation that leads you to tense up
          or lash out in frustration, you can reenter your frame of mind at that time
          and see what it feels like to not engage in those defenses. Very often a dif-
          ferent set of feelings will emerge in the situation: ones that you hadn’t been
          aware of. For example, when you refuse to shout and blame others, you
          may find that you feel saddened for yourself, pained at your losses. This
          frees you to address the pain and support yourself, rather than bury the
          feelings beneath a show of anger.
               Enhanced emotional awareness can lead to a feeling of empowerment,
          not greater distress. A good psychodynamic counselor or therapist will
          challenge our defenses, not letting us get away with the various strategies
          we use to keep difficult feelings at bay. What results is awareness that the
          feelings we’ve been avoiding are not so devastating after all. Perhaps at
          one time in life, when we were young and more vulnerable, we couldn’t
          cope with those feelings and had to do our best to erase them. Now, as ma-
          ture adults, we don’t have to run. Feeling our most threatening emotions
          and seeing, at the end of it all, that we had nothing so terrible to fear after
          all is a tremendously powerful and empowering experience.
               So what are you running from? Think of your worst trading patterns
          as defensive maneuvers: actions you’re taking to ward off emotional
          pain. Then, when you refuse to act on those patterns, just sit with the expe-
          rience and see what you feel. See if you can find a different way to handle
          that feeling. Very, very often, beneath our impulsive trading, our anxious
          avoidance of risk, our outbursts, and our mismanagement of risk are ef-
          forts to protect us from a painful emotional experience. Once you find that
          experience and contact those feelings, you find there’s nothing to run from.
          You can handle loss, fears of failure, and disappointment. As your coach,
          you only need to prove that to you.

                     COACHING CUE

          Massage can be an excellent tool for reducing physical tension, but also for
          learning about your body’s pattern of tension. When you become more aware of
          your body, you can catch yourself tensing muscles and restricting your breath-
          ing and then make conscious eﬀorts to relax. When you relax in this manner
          by loosening muscles and deepening breathing, you are opening yourself to
          emotional experience—and new ways of handling your feelings.
