P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




                                     CHAPTER 3




                              Psychological
                               Well-Being
                       Enhancing Trading Experience



                    Happiness is the meaning and the purpose of life,
                    the whole aim and end of human existence.
                                                           —Aristotle



                 ecent research into what has been called positive psychology has

         R       yielded insights into the importance of well-being: positive emo-
                 tional experience. It is not enough to cope with stress and minimize
          distress. If we’re going to maximize performance, it means that we need
          to make the most of our concentration, motivation, and energy. How many
          times have I seen traders miss trades or fail to prepare adequately for the
          day, simply because they were worn down, not operating at their peak? An
          Olympic athlete would never think of coming to his event in less than the
          best shape. Too often, however, traders will risk their capital after being
          sleep-deprived, burned out, or distracted. How you manage your trading
          will depend, in part, on how you manage the rest of your life.
               But what is well-being and how can we maximize it? A wealth of re-
          search, much of it conducted in the past decade and unknown to traders
          and even trading coaches, helps us answer these questions. Let’s take a
          look at how you can coach yourself toward more positive experience—and
          performance.

          LESSON 21: THE IMPORTANCE OF
          FEELING GOOD

          One of the most overrated variables in trading psychology is passion for
          trading or passion for the markets. Self-reported passion means a great

                                                                                 67
