P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          267

              magicians, but they follow the price of the instruments they trade for
              such a long time, they no longer need indicators or charts. But if you
              ask them, they will tell you that there is divergence on price and that
              a bottom or top might be near, that right now will be a great buying or
              selling opportunity. All these traders have looked at charts, they have
              used all the common and not so common indicators or oscillators or
              volume analysis and after a while they removed them from their charts
              until they were back at the beginning looking at a bare chart, but now
              knowing that there is no holy grail among these indicators. Nothing
              will give you 100 percent winning trades, so it’s futile to search for it.
              You need to focus your efforts somewhere else to succeed.”

              Having Trust in Yourself
              “I’m a discretionary trader,” Chris points out. “This means that I have
              certain trade rules, which provide me with a trade setup, but I decide
              on a, let’s call it gut feeling whether I take the trade or not. I have
              tried a few times already to build a successful mechanical trading sys-
              tem, but I was never able to boil my trade rules down to a mechanical
              system that I could trust enough to trade. On the other hand I have
              accepted that my subconscious mind is a better computer than my me-
              chanical skills will ever be. Maybe if I tried my hands at neural nets,
              I could come up with a working mechanical trade system, but then I
              would not understand the rules any longer and that means I would not
              trust it enough to trade it. The subconscious mind will not give clear
              instructions; it communicates through feelings. You need to learn to
              listen to them, if you want to use its power. But if you do, it can be
              a nearly unlimited resource you shouldn’t ignore. To teach or program
              your subconscious mind to do its job, you need to invest a lot of screen
              time. You need to expose it to as many situations as possible . . . to de-
              velop that trust in yourself, the trust that you will always do what’s
              right for you.”


              If you don’t trust yourself or your methods, you will not find the
              emotional resilience to weather periods of loss.


              Standing Up after Being Beaten Down
              “Being bankrupt, having a real bad day: yes it happens,” Chris explains.
              “Many traders trading for their own account will have gone through
              such a slump not once but multiple times before they manage to de-
              velop their account. When I started trading, I had lost a huge amount
