P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          100                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          if we’re not aware of its existence. Very often in brief therapy, the first
          homework exercises involve self-monitoring. Just as observing market
          patterns precede our ability to trade them, becoming aware of our own
          patterns is the first step in changing them.
               One of the most common ways to monitor oneself is through the use of
          trading journals. Active intraday traders might make entries during a mid-
          day break and at the end of the trading day; others might simply write in
          the journal at the end of each day in which they are making trading deci-
          sions. The key is to catch your patterns as soon after they occur as possible,
          rather than rely upon fallible memory.
               Note that self-monitoring is not a change technique in itself, but it
          often leads to changes. Once you see your patterns with crystal clarity—
          including their costly consequences—it becomes much easier to inter-
          rupt them and prevent their future occurrence. At other times, self-
          monitoring may alert you to patterns that you didn’t know were present.
          This is exceedingly valuable, as it lays the groundwork for change that
          otherwise would have been impossible.
               Any time you systematically review your performance over time—and
          the factors associated with successful and unsuccessful performance—
          you’re engaging in self-monitoring. For example, I reviewed my recent trad-
          ing results trade by trade and found that I was taking larger point losers on
          small trades than on my larger ones. This review led to the realization that,
          when trades were quite small, I was not as vigilant in setting and sticking
          to stop-loss levels. Although the total dollar loss for each small trade was
          not huge, over time the small losses added up. This led me to establish a
          new routine for setting and sticking to stop-losses with small trades by ex-
          plicitly writing out my risk/reward ratio for each trade before I placed the
          order. The self-monitoring made me more conscious of what I was doing,
          which in turn kept me trading well.


              Self-monitoring is the foundation on which all coaching efforts are
              built.


               My experience is that the best predictor of failure in the trading profes-
          sion is the inability to sustain self-monitoring. This inability leaves traders
          unable to clearly identify their problem patterns, and it prevents them from
          reflecting and learning from their efforts at change. Goals without self-
          monitoring are but mere good intentions; they never translate into concrete
          actions to initiate and sustain change.
               Why would a trader, seemingly desirous of success, not sustain ef-
          forts to monitor her own thoughts, emotions, and/or trading performance?
