P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          90                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          proprietary trading firm that frantically searches for stocks in play, robot-
          ically fading moves or chasing strength or weakness? The mere thought is
          ludicrous. Would he attend a few seminars or read a couple of books and
          trade the same untested chart patterns as other beginners? It’s unthinkable.
               No, Howard Roark the trader would be a keen student of markets, just
          as Roark the architect was a devoted student of building materials and
          methods. He wouldn’t trade a single method in all markets, just as he didn’t
          repeat the same design to fit all housing sites. Rather, he would carefully
          consider each unique situation and tailor the strategy to fit the present con-
          text. Roark the trader would work from carefully considered plans, just as
          he worked from blueprints that he had developed from scratch. In short,
          Roark would approach trading the same way he approached architecture:
          as an expression of his creative vision and the sheer joy of giving birth to
          something new and valuable.
               Most of all, Roark the trader, like the architect Roark, would stand
          for something. He would have a view of markets and how and why mar-
          kets move, just as he had a view of design and building. It would be his
          view, not something borrowed slavishly from tradition or current fads.
          The odds are good that this view would be unconventional and meet with
          more than a little skepticism by the self-appointed gurus of trading. That
          wouldn’t matter. Roark the trader would remain faithful to his framework.
          When confronted with the choice of following the crowd versus act on his
          convictions, he wouldn’t hesitate to do the right thing.


               Every great trader I have known has an outlook and a set of meth-
               ods that are distinctively his own.

               For that reason, economic success for trader Roark would be a tangi-
          ble indicator of his efficacy and the rightness of his efforts. It is effect, not
          cause. He doesn’t trade to simply make money any more than he builds to
          sell homes and office buildings. Roark the architect built because that was
          what he was meant to do. Even when he didn’t have clients, he was design-
          ing buildings in his mind and in his sketches. Similarly, trader Roark would
          be tracking and investigating markets even if he wasn’t placing orders. His
          work is an extension of who he is; his profits are the result of years of effort
          and integrity.
               One’s work could entail raising a child, building a business, design-
          ing a high-rise structure, or developing a unique framework for analyz-
          ing and trading financial markets. Each, to be accomplished well, requires
          sustained, dedicated effort; a vision of what can be; and a willingness
          to pursue that vision even when it’s more comfortable to slide by. This
          is the true source of emotional resilience: a pride and esteem so deep
