P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                           51


          high-percentage shots to get the players back on track mentally. Similarly,
          you want to set yourself up for psychological success by setting achievable
          goals that move you and your trading forward.
               Finally, if burnout is contributing to the lack of optimism, then the
          challenge is to consciously structure your life outside of trading by en-
          suring proper time for physical exercise, social activity, and overall time
          away from markets. An excellent strategy for achieving psychological di-
          versification is to have significant life goals apart from trading. If all the
          psychological eggs are in the trading basket, it will be difficult to sustain
          energy and enthusiasm when profits are scarce.
               Being your own trading coach doesn’t mean talking yourself into feel-
          ing good. Sometimes there are good reasons for lacking positive emotion.
          The superior coach will listen for those reasons and turn them into prods
          for constructive change.


                      COACHING CUE

          How psychologically diversiﬁed are you? How much stress and distress are you
          experiencing in your social life, your family life, and in your general emotional
          state? How much satisfaction are you experiencing in each of these areas? What
          sustains you when trading goes poorly? What problems from your personal life
          creep into your trading day? How is your physical ﬁtness? Your quality of sleep
          and concentration? Your energy level? It’s worth evaluating the nontrading as-
          pects of life as well as your market results with monthly reviews. If the other
          parts of your life are generating distress, it’s only a matter of time before that
          compromises your focus, decision-making, and performance.




          LESSON 17: WHAT TO DO WHEN FEAR
          TAKES OVER

          Fear is a normal emotional response in the face of danger. Under condi-
          tions of fear, we are primed for flight or fight: running from the source
          of danger or confronting it. As we’ve seen, sometimes the dangers we re-
          spond to are not objective sources of threat, but ones that we interpret as
          threats. When we are prone to perceiving normal situations as threats, fear
          becomes anxiety. We experience the full flight or fight response, but there
          is nothing to run from or fight. The danger is in our perception, not in the
          environment.
              When we feel nervous in a trade or feel nervous about putting on a
          trade, it’s important to know whether our response is one of fear or one
          of anxiety. Is there a genuine danger in the market environment, or is the
          danger in our head?
