P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                            305

              breakdowns by market will often shift over time, as certain markets
              yield greater opportunities and others go dry. Tracking results over
              time can be a great way of seeing, in real time, when and how mar-
              kets are changing.

               “I’ve seen numerous traders increase their P/L by minimizing trading
          losses and increasing the frequency and/or size of their winners after ap-
          plying one or more of the techniques above,” David concludes. “From what
          I’ve seen, it’s most effective to conduct your analysis or review of your trad-
          ing no more than once a week, and ideally once every two weeks or even
          once a month.”
               Intuition—the result of implicit learning that occurs after long peri-
          ods of observing market patterns—may play an important role in getting
          traders into and out of positions. Even the most intuitive and discretionary
          trading, however, can benefit from analytics: knowing which markets
          and time frames offer opportunity and measuring how well you’re taking
          advantage of that opportunity. Ultimately, you are your own trading sys-
          tem. Your task, as your own performance coach, is to know how your sys-
          tem operates, avoid its shortcomings, and maximize its strengths. The in-
          sights and tools provided by Rennie and Dave are excellent guides in the
          quest to become more scientific in the management of our trading business.


                     COACHING CUE

          The contributors to this chapter have provided a wealth of insights, derived
          from ﬁrsthand experience, as to the principles and practices that can improve
          your trading. A worthwhile exercise is to review each of the contributor’s ideas
          and identify the overlap: the points emphasized by more than one contributor.
          These points of overlap represent important best practices that can guide your
          eﬀorts going forward.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          9: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-nine-links.html
               The contributors to this chapter maintain their own web sites, which
          offer a wealth of resources to developing traders. Here are links to the
          contributors to this chapter and their web sites:
