P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          112                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          former only. When we use coaching to build strengths rather than simply
          shoring up weaknesses, that solution focus produces surprising—and sur-
          prisingly rapid—results.

              For more on the solution-focused approach to change, check out
              The Psychology of Trading

             There are several reasons why a solution focus is helpful for traders
          who seek to coach themselves:
            r Motivation—It is easier to stay motivated and optimistic when we
              emphasize what we’re doing right, not just where we fall short. Imagine
              a sports coach who only harped on players’ weaknesses. Over time,
              that would be demoralizing. When the focus is strengths, coaching can
              be empowering and inspiring without ignoring changes that need to be
              made or the urgency of making those changes.
            r Goal Setting—Knowing what you’ve done wrong, in and of itself, does
              not tell you what you need to do right. When you focus on your best
              trading, you can identify specific patterns that are associated with your
              success and turn these into concrete goals for future work.
            r Bang for the Buck—Working solely on improving weak areas is un-
              likely to create strengths; at best, you’ll take a deficient area and bring
              it to average. It’s making the most of strengths and learning how to
              work around shortcomings that produces optimal performance results.
               One of the reasons I emphasize the importance of paper (simulation)
          trading and playing with different trading styles and markets is that this
          experience enables you to observe your own strengths firsthand. Many,
          many times, traders stumble across their performance niches when they
          discover something they’re good at. If you don’t know your strengths, it’s
          unlikely that you’ll be able to systematically build on them and turn them
          into drivers of elite performance.
               But you might wonder, “How do I stay solution focused if, day after
          day, I’m in a slump and losing money?” It is difficult to stay connected to
          our strengths when our failings are written all over our P/L summaries!
               We’ve seen that this question is a particular challenge when we
          identify winning days as good trading and losing days as bad trading. This
          thinking makes it difficult to observe and appreciate good trading when
          we’re not making money. But traders can trade well—they can take setups
          with demonstrated edges, size positions well, and manage the risk of their
          trades—even if trades happen to go against them. After all, even a 60 to
          40 edge per trade ensures that a trader, over time, will have sequences of
          consecutive losing trades and/or days. If you define good and bad trading
          in terms of process, not just outcome, you can observe strengths during
