P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                        311


          typically happens the week following a very strong down week?” This ques-
          tion is better than asking, “What typically happens the week following a
          very strong down week during the month of March when gold has been
          up and bonds have been down?” The latter question will yield a small sam-
          ple of matching occasions—perhaps only three over many years—so that
          it would be difficult to generalize from these. While I will occasionally look
          at patterns with a small N simply as a way to determine if the current mar-
          ket is behaving in historically unusual ways, it is the patterns that have at
          least 20 occurrences during a look-back period that will merit the greatest
          attention. The more conditions we add to a search, the more we limit the
          sample and make generalization difficult.


              The simplest patterns will tend to be the most robust.


                Of course, the number of occurrences in a look-back period will partly
          depend on the frequency of data that you investigate. With 415 minutes in a
          trading day for stock index futures, you would have 8,300 observations of
          one-minute patterns in a 20-day period. If you were investigating daily data,
          the same number of observations would have to cover a period exceed-
          ing 30 years. Databases with high frequency data can become unwieldy in
          a hurry and require dedicated database applications. The simple histori-
          cal investigations that I conduct utilize database functions in a flat Excel
          file. When I investigate a limited number of variables over a manageable
          time frame, I find this to be adequate to my needs. Clearly, a system de-
          veloper who is going to test many variables over many time frames would
          need a relational database or a dedicated system-testing platform, such as
          TradeStation. The kind of hypothesis-generating activities covered in this
          chapter are most appropriate for discretionary traders who would like to
          be a bit more systematic and selective in their selection of market patterns
          to trade—not formal system developers.
                Before you frame hypotheses worthy of historical exploration, you
          need to create your data set. This data set would include a range of vari-
          ables over a defined time period. The variables that you select would
          reflect the markets and indicators that you typically consult when mak-
          ing discretionary trading decisions. For instance, if you trade off lead-lag
          relationships among stock market sectors, you’ll need to include sector
          indexes/ETFs in your database. If you trade gap patterns in individual
          stocks, you’ll need daily open-high-low-close prices for each issue that you
          trade at the very least. Some of the patterns I track in my own trading in-
          volve the number of stocks making new highs or lows; this is included in
          my database with separate columns on a sheet dedicated to each.
