P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              255

          discretionary sector and buys consumer staples stocks that are more
          recession-proof.
              The short-term trader may look at a Market Profile graphic covering
          the past week and observe a broad trading range, with the majority of vol-
          ume transacted in the middle of that range. As the market moves to the top
          of that range, the trader sees that many sectors are nowhere near break-
          ing out. Moreover, overall market volume is light during the move, with as
          much volume transacted at the market bid as at the offer. From this config-
          uration, the short-term trader theorizes that there is not sufficient demand
          to push the market’s value area higher. She then places a trade to sell the
          market, in anticipation of a move back into the middle of the range.


              Thematic thinking turns market data into market hypotheses.


               The key to thematic thinking is the synthesizing of a range of data into
          a coherent picture. Many traders, particularly beginners, only look at their
          market in their time frame. Their view is myopic; all they see are shapes
          on a chart. The factors that actually catalyze the movement of capital—
          news, economic conditions, tests of value areas, intraday and longer-term
          sentiment—remain invisible to them. Without the ability to read the mar-
          ket’s themes, they trade the same way under all market conditions. They’ll
          trade breakout moves in trending markets and in slow, choppy ones.
          They’ll fade gaps whether currencies and interest rates are impelling a
          repricing of markets or not. Little wonder that they are mystified when
          their trading suddenly turns from green to red: they don’t understand why
          markets are behaving as they are.
               There is much to be said for keeping trading logic simple. The synthesis
          of market data into coherent themes is a great way to distill a large amount
          of information into actionable patterns. In the quest for simplicity, how-
          ever, traders can gravitate to the simplistic. A setup—a particular configu-
          ration of prices or oscillators—may aid execution of a trade idea, but it is
          not an explanation of why you think a market is going to do what you antic-
          ipate. The clearer you are about the logic of your trade, the clearer you’ll be
          about when the trade is going in your favor and when it is going against you.
               Intermarket relationships are particularly fertile ground for the devel-
          opment of themes. You’ll notice in the TraderFeed blog that I regularly
          update how sectors of the stock market are trading relative to one an-
          other. This alerts us to themes of economic growth and weakness, as well
          as to lead-lag relationships in the market. These sector themes change
          periodically—financial issues that had been market leaders recently be-
          came severe laggards—but they tend to be durable over the intermediate-
          term, setting up worthwhile trade ideas for active traders.
