P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           303


          data exchange), it’s a relatively simple process to have one-minute NYSE
          TICK data updating constantly in your spreadsheet. Once this has been ac-
          complished, you can easily create your own cumulative TICK. Here’s how:
          Set up a spreadsheet with columns A, B, and C containing the date, time,
          and close of the NYSE TICK ($TICK in e-Signal). It should start at row
          2 and contain the last 390 one-minute bars, the equivalent of one full trad-
          ing day. In the first row of column D, enter a zero. In the first row of column
          E, enter a space, followed by today’s date (the space is due to a quirk on
          e-Signal’s part). Then jump down to the second row of column D and enter
          the following formula:

                                   = if(a2 = $E$1,c2+d1,d1)

          “and fill it down through all 390 rows. This states that, if the date matches
          today, then take the most recent closing one-minute TICK and add it to
          the running total for the session. As the data comes in, this will automat-
          ically build a cumulative TICK in column D, which can then be charted
          to provide a real-time intraday chart of the cumulative TICK. Draw a line
          at the zero mark and watch the cumulative TICK reveal the underlying
          buying and selling pressure that is hidden in the noise of the NYSE TICK.”


              The cumulative TICK reveals the trend of daily sentiment.


               David Adler approaches the use of data for self-coaching in a different
          manner, focusing on the assessment of trading performance itself. “The
          philosophy behind TraderDNA, which I firmly believe,” he explains, “is the
          idea of being cognizant of what happened (in terms of your performance)
          within a given session, week, month, etc. of your trading, so that, going for-
          ward, the negative aspects can be minimized and the positive can be max-
          imized. The fundamental idea is that, if the trader is able to look back on
          a certain time period of his trading and understand more about the overall
          result, then he can be proactive . . . in preventing the same mistakes going
          forward. Likewise, he can identify strengths and focus on situations that
          are likely to result in a profit based upon what his past trading has shown.
               “Our users extract their order data from their front-end software,”
          David Adler notes, “and import the data into TraderDNA. This affords them
          the opportunity to thoroughly analyze their data in order to understand
          more about the strengths and weaknesses of their trading: specifically,
          their performance trends, where their losses came from, characteristics
          of their trades, the differences in their winners and losers, amongst other
          things.” Here are some of the analytics provided by the software, along with
          David’s commentary:
