P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          272                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              consisted of more than just my own experiences increased my rate of
              learning tremendously. I was able to share in others successes and de-
              feats and learn from what they did right and wrong. To me this was
              invaluable because some of the experiences they had to endure were
              ones that I hoped to never find myself in. I could see what happened
              and try and learn from the situation.”
                    I find this theme again and again with successful professionals:
              much of their success comes from the accelerated learning curve af-
              forded by being in the right settings. Trevor’s experience suggests that
              it’s not necessary to be employed by a trading firm to find that environ-
              ment. Just being around experienced peer professionals can multiply
              learning experience.


              If you want to experience yourself as successful, place yourself
              in settings and situations where you can interact with successful
              people.


              Self-Awareness
              Trevor emphasizes the importance of knowing yourself as a trader.
              “For me,” he explains, “when I entered into trading in 1998 after grad-
              uating from college everyone was telling me pit trading was what I
              needed to do. I had always been much more of an introvert and very
              proficient on the computer.” He quickly found pit trading not to his
              liking and became involved in the emerging electronic Globex trading
              platform. He also recognized that his trading style was naturally risk-
              averse and stayed within his comfort zone. “My personality was much
              more oriented to taking frequent trades and keeping my losses under
              control,” Trevor recalls. “This worked very well for me because very
              rarely would I have a day that would get away from me.” We hear many
              generalizations about the best or right way to trade. Trevor’s insight
              was that his trading had to fit who he was. His success came from
              sticking to his basic strengths and interests.

              Discipline
              “This makes or breaks traders from what I saw,” Trevor points out.
              “When you are trading your own money with no risk manager breath-
              ing down your neck, you better have discipline. Without it, it will be
              just a matter of time before you blow up and are unable to recover.”
              Indeed, this discipline is what makes the learning curve possible. “I
              was often early on many trades because I lacked the patience to let
