P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                       91


          that one is unwilling to compromise oneself in the face of setbacks and
          disappointments.
               What about your trading is uniquely yours? What have you developed
          that most distinctly distinguishes you as a trader? What is the vision behind
          your trading? That is your core, your essence as a trader. When you’re trad-
          ing well, you’re remaining true to that essence, and that will serve you well
          during the most challenging times. If you can’t provide detailed answers
          to these questions, are you truly ready to be risking your capital? Will you
          really have the confidence to weather adversity, with only borrowed ideas
          and methods to draw upon? Read Chapter 9 of this book carefully; you’ll
          see that experienced traders build a career from their work from figuring
          markets out for themselves and then remaining true to their ideas and to
          the evidence of their senses.


                      COACHING CUE

          This lesson shows why it is so important to follow one’s trading plans. The
          plans may not be perfect, and they may not work well at times. If, however,
          you are to build conﬁdence in your judgment and train yourself to act with
          integrity, there’s no alternative to following the ideas you believe to be correct.
          You cannot build conﬁdence by abandoning your convictions and contradicting
          your perceptions. The clearer you are about your market views, mapping out
          your actions under various scenarios and your rationales for trades, the easier
          it will be to act on your judgment and see, in your own experience, your own
          progress and growth.




          LESSON 29: MAXIMIZE CONFIDENCE
          AND STAY WITH YOUR TRADES

          A great deal has been written about risk management and the importance
          of stop-losses. A stop-loss, ideally, is that point that tells you that your ini-
          tial trade idea is wrong. Traders establish firm stops that are closer to the
          point of entry than the price targets and help ensure a favorable risk/reward
          profile to each trade. You can generally tell a professional trader by the way
          she closes out a losing trade. The exit is automatic, not a cause for conster-
          nation. Loss is an accepted part of the game. The good traders learn from
          those losses and use them to revise market views. A losing trade, as a re-
          sult, can set up the next winning trade.
               Much harder for many traders and far less remarked upon is
          something we might call stop-profits. Traders who religiously adhere
