P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                        41

          out my head, and start the afternoon fresh. Again, the slow action affects
          neither my feelings nor my trading behavior.
               If, however, I start my day telling myself that I must make at least sev-
          eral thousand dollars each day, then I’ll now perceive the slow market as a
          threat to my trading goal. The narrow, whippy action translates into lack of
          opportunity, which translates into lack of profit, which translates into lack
          of success. It’s easy to see, with that mental framework, how I could wind
          up viewing slow markets as threats to my career. It’s no wonder that the
          slow market would trigger my distress and overtrading.
               But, of course, it’s not merely the slow market that is generating my
          negative mood and behavior; it’s my perception of that market. Perception
          is the filter that we place between events and our responses to events. If
          we place a distorting lens over our eyes, we will see the world in distorted
          ways. If we adopt distorted perceptions of markets and ourselves, we’ll
          experience trading in distorted ways.


              Can we alter our perceptions? Chapter 6 deals with cognitive ap-
              proaches to change that restructure thought processes.


               So how do we change the filters that turn normal trading experience
          into abnormal events?
               The rule is simple: if you don’t know your filters, you cannot change
          them. Becoming aware of the expectations and beliefs that shape your
          perception is essential to the process of shifting your perception.
               Here’s a simple exercise that can aid you in becoming more aware of
          any distorted perceptions you might hold:
               Every time you experience a distinctly negative emotional reaction
          to a market event, consciously ask yourself, “How am I perceiving the
          current market as a threat?” This turns your attention to your percep-
          tual processes, giving you a chance to separate perceived threat from real
          threat.
               A simple example comes from my recent trading. I really wanted to
          finish the week on a high-water note in my equity curve and found myself
          with a nice profit on a Friday morning trade to the long side. As the trade
          moved my way, I moved my stop to breakeven. The trade continued to go
          my way a bit before making a small reversal. It then chopped around for a
          few minutes. I found myself becoming nervous with the trade, as if it were
          on the verge of plunging below my stop point.
               I quickly asked myself, “Why am I nervous with this trade? Why am
          I perceiving the trade with so much uneasiness?” A moment’s reflection
          and review of the market told me that the trade was perfectly fine and
          progressing according to plan. It was my desire to end the week profitably
          (after an extended flat period of performance, I should add) that turned
