P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                 69

          suicidal—to benefit from psychological help when positive emotions are
          chronically absent.


              The Resources for Chapter 1 include a source for brief therapy
              referrals through the Beck Institute for Cognitive Therapy and
              Research.

               The majority of people, however, experience varying balances of posi-
          tive and negative emotions as a function of life circumstances. When their
          lives affirm their values and needs, they enjoy the emotions listed above.
          When life fails to meet their needs, they respond with unhappiness, frus-
          tration, and diminished energy. In this sense, positive emotions serve as
          life barometers, informing us of the degree to which we’re doing the right
          things for us.
               You can see, then, why positive emotions are so important to trading.
          If you’re trading well, learning and developing, and succeeding in your ef-
          forts, your positive emotions should outweigh the negative ones over time.
          The dominant emotional experience of your work should be the kind of
          pride, satisfaction, and sense of accomplishment that gives you energy and
          optimism. If you’re not trading well, if you’re not growing and developing
          as a trader, and if your efforts are not yielding success, your experience of
          trading is apt to be more negative. You’ll spend less time feeling satisfac-
          tion, energy, and optimism than frustration, overload, and discouragement.
               This is important because the energy and optimism generated by
          happiness and personal fulfillment are what sustain the trader’s learn-
          ing curve. They fuel concentration, and they help traders make the extra
          efforts that result in superior internalization of patterns. The trader who
          sustains high well-being is more apt to have the confidence to aggressively
          pursue good trades and lay off marginal ones. The trader with a positive
          emotional experience is less apt to make impulsive trades out of frustration
          and more likely to have the resilience needed to weather losing periods. In
          short, feeling good is a huge part of performing well, because we function
          best cognitively under conditions of emotional wellness.


              Emotional well-being fuels cognitive efficiency. We think best
              when we feel good.


               As your own trading coach, a constructive step you can take is to track
          your emotional experience over time. A simple adjective checklist filled out
          at the end of each trading day can provide you with a sense for whether you
          are in the emotional zone or swimming against emotional currents. One
          such simple checklist is shown in Figure 3.1.
