P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                       31



              Successful coaching means working as hard at maintaining
              changes as initiating them.


           4. Stay Active. The research literature in psychology finds that change
              is most likely to occur when we are active in its pursuit. That is, we
              change by enacting new patterns—by doing new things—not simply
              by talking about change or thinking about it. I often joke that traders
              approach coaching like many people treat church: they go once a week
              to feel virtuous and forget about it for the next six days. A truly re-
              ligious person wants to live their beliefs every day; if you’re going to
              get the religion of virtuous trading, it’s no different. That is why each
              goal should be accompanied by specific daily activities that help you
              make progress. If your goal is better risk management, then you want
              to work on managing the risk of every trade. If your goal is a better
              mindset, then you want to perform specific exercises each day to keep
              calm and focused. You won’t change your behavior by changing your
              mind; you’ll start thinking differently once you enact new behavior
              patterns.
           5. Stay Positive. “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,” is the philosophy of those
              who fail to work on trading until they’re broke. If you’re trading well,
              that’s one of the best times to coach yourself . Your goal isn’t to change
              what’s working; it’s to become even more consistent in your efforts.
              Doing more of what works is a valuable goal that helps you press your
              advantage when you’re doing well. The alternative, sitting back on your
              laurels when you’re making money, will bring comfort, but not elite
              levels of success. I recently met with a prop trader who was trading
              very well on relatively small size. A quick look at his Sharpe Ratio and
              trading results suggested that he could be making much more money
              simply by running more risk in his portfolio and sticking to his bread-
              and-butter setups and markets. We developed a plan for doing that and
              he turned good success into outstanding success. By formulating pos-
              itive goals—focusing on changes that involve doing more of the right
              things—he made the most of his strengths. It’s for that reason that I
              often tell people that the best time for coaching is when you’re doing
              really well and really poorly.

               The best traders, I find, are those who have made self-improvement
          a way of life. Such traders are driven in their work lives, their physical
          fitness, and their recreations. They derive great meaning and satisfaction
          from being the best they can be. The same is true of great athletes: they
          love working out; they constantly challenge themselves. It’s when change is
