P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                   85

          children can use the unit by clicking on video game features that play the
          game by keeping HRV readings high.
                After a while using the biofeedback, you learn that keeping yourself
          still, focusing your attention, and keeping your breathing deep and rhyth-
          mical is the best way of generating high HRV scores. (Users can set the
          software for various levels of difficulty to build skills.) The emWave is thus
          a training tool—teaching users to control mind and body—and a way of
          tracking focused attention over time. There are other, similar units avail-
          able (for example, Journey to the Wild Divine); ease of use and the appeal
          of the graphical interface will dictate most traders’ preferences. If I had
          to invest in a single psychological tool to aid trading, this kind of biofeed-
          back unit would be my choice. It is highly portable and can even be used
          in real time during trading, with the feedback screen minimized but sound
          enabled.


              Biofeedback is a tool for training yourself to control the arousal
              level of mind and body.

               When you are your own trading coach, it’s important to keep your
          mind in shape much as an athlete stays in proper conditioning. I find that
          5 to 10 minutes each morning prior to the start of trading is useful in bring-
          ing a quiet mind to trading. During that time, you stay completely still in a
          comfortable seated position and breathe deeply, slowly, and very rhythmi-
          cally. Your eyes can be closed throughout and you can focus your attention
          on your breathing, on soothing imagery, or on quiet music through head-
          phones. The key is staying in that Yoda state described in The Psychology
          of Trading: very relaxed, yet very alert and focused. As you practice this
          each day, you build skills, so that you can eventually quiet your mind on de-
          mand, with only a few deep, rhythmical breaths. This is enormously helpful
          during hectic times during the trading day, keeping you out of situations in
          which you become impulsive and reactive in the face of moving markets.
               Just as you prepare for the day’s trading by studying recent market
          action, reviewing charts, and identifying areas of opportunity, it makes
          sense to engage in mental preparation to build the mind-set needed to
          capitalize on your ideas. Your assignment is to devote a portion of each
          morning to mental preparation and the generation of a quiet mind. If you
          have difficulty sustaining the effort or reaching that Yoda state, consider in-
          corporating biofeedback into your morning routine, much as athletes work
          out daily on treadmills and weight machines. Mastering your mind state is
          a key component of mastering performance: if you can sustain serenity
          during the most boring market occasions, you’ll be well prepared to catch
          moves when trading picks up.
