P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           287


          research.” He explains, “I know that sounds like one answer repeated three
          times, but it’s not. It’s the top three answers . . . I’ve been through several
          stages in my career and traded using different methodologies. The one con-
          stant I’ve found with any method of trading I’ve employed is that it takes
          a substantial amount of research outside of market hours to successfully
          implement them.”
               Rob Hanna started his career day trading, focusing on short-term se-
          tups, such as those described in Jeff Cooper’s Hit and Run books. What
          Rob found most useful was not the setup patterns, but the screening for
          volatile, trending stocks to implement the strategies. He began creating
          his own scans based on trading patterns, focusing on trades with the best
          risk/reward. “I wrote down each potential trade in a notebook along with
          the trigger price for the next trading day,” Rob described. “When the trade
          was done, I would log the results in my accounting software. I kept a field
          in the accounting database called reason. It was there I entered the name
          of the setup I used to initiate the trade.” This is a theme we see time and
          again with successful traders: they track their results meticulously to aid
          their learning curves.


              Keeping records of trades that work cements success patterns in
              your mind.

               Rob Hanna points out that keeping his trades in a database accom-
          plished two goals: it forced him to have a reason for every trade, and it
          enabled him to track his results as a function of the trade setups employed.
          “It made it extremely easy for me to determine which setups worked best
          and which ones struggled,” he explains. “By doing this, I knew which setups
          I should continue to focus on and which ones I should scrap altogether.”
          When Rob didn’t have a solid reason for a trade, he simply entered the
          word Hunch as the reason for the trade. “It didn’t take long for me to fig-
          ure out how much the Hunch trades were costing,” he recounts. He quickly
          scrapped trading from hunch alone.
               The second phase of Rob’s research occurred when he switched to
          longer-term trading that utilized patterns inspired by William O’Neil’s
          CANSLIM approach. Rob began to utilize technical screens with the
          TC2000 software from Worden Bros., with his final lists filtered through
          fundamental criteria. “With TC2000,” he describes, “I am able to easily
          place notes on the chart. This is incredibly useful. If a stock pops up with
          an interesting pattern, I may have already researched that stock in recent
          weeks. With the note feature, I can see if I already checked the funda-
          mentals and rejected it for some reason. No need to waste time looking
          up the same symbol over and over.” As with the day-trading patterns, the
