P1: JYS
conc    JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:18    Printer: Yet to come




         340                                                                CONCLUSION



         and meaning. It’s about making such a profound impact that someone,
         somewhere will want to conclude their book with a dedication to you.


             Your life is a partially finished work of art.

              There’s an old saw that we tend to marry people like our parents. In my
         younger days, I would have been horrified at the prospect. Looking back on
         my mother’s impact on her family and my wife Margie’s impact on hers, I
         know that the rule holds true for me. Margie’s greatest talent is that she is
         secure enough within herself to help others feel special about themselves.
         When one of our children went through a difficult marriage, I never once
         worried. I knew that she would eventually find happiness, because she had
         the experience of being special to her mother. When you have that deep
         feeling of not being ordinary, you ultimately gravitate toward the best
         within you, the best for you.
              If you are going to be successful as your own coach, you will need to
         be like Connie and Margie; you’ll need to sustain a relationship with your-
         self in which you are always special, no matter how daunting immediate
         obstacles may seem. You’ll need to focus on your successes every bit as
         much—if not more—than your failures. You’ll need to structure specific
         goals and concrete activities designed to achieve those, so that every day is
         an affirmation of drive and competence. Self-coaching is not about keeping
         journals or tracking your profits and losses. It’s about forging a relationship
         with yourself that is as empowering as a mother’s with a family.
              At the end of all of this, you may decide that trading is not your path
         in life. Have the courage to embrace that and find the work that truly cap-
         tures who you are and what you do best. I love trading—the intellectual
         challenge, the endless opportunities for improvement, and the immediacy
         of the feedback. You know when you’ve done well; you know when you’ve
         let yourself down. While trading has made me money, it’s not truly what
         I do best. I once tried to be a full-time trader and quickly felt a large hole
         in my life where psychology—and working with people—had vanished. So
         now I trade markets on the side, work as a coach to professional traders,
         apply my greatest interests and talents in the most challenging settings,
         and write books that maybe, just maybe, will help others find what is spe-
         cial within them.

             Let your strengths define your path.

            Know what you do best. Build on strengths. Never stop working on
         yourself. Never stop improving. Every so often, upset the apple cart and
