P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                209

          traded full size in his positions and his profits and losses swung wildly. Un-
          prepared emotionally for those swings, he became impulsive and, one day,
          abandoned all discipline, blowing himself up on a single trade he allowed
          to get away from him. He never recovered from that loss and eventually
          had to start over at another firm.


              It is impossible to remain emotionally stable if you greatly amplify
              your P/L swings.


               When traders are undercapitalized and still hope to trade for a living,
          they too are impelled to take high levels of risk to achieve their desired re-
          turns. The result is that their portfolio swings wildly, with gains and losses
          that represent a large portion of total account value. These financial swings
          bring emotional swings, both positive and negative. The larger the finan-
          cial swings, on average, the larger the emotional swings. The larger the
          emotional swings, the greater the potential for the development of learned,
          conditioned responses that disrupt future trading.
               When a trader undergoes an emotionally harrowing loss, many of
          the situational factors associated with that trade may become associ-
          ated with the emotional pain. Some of these situational factors, from the
          trader’s physical state to the particular type of movement in the market,
          may be quite random. Nonetheless, they can trigger the emotional pain,
          much like sitting in a passenger seat triggered my anxiety following the
          automobile accident. A trader who consulted me about problems pulling
          the trigger on good trade setups experienced precisely that problem. He
          had lost significant money shorting the market during an uptrend, incurring
          several large losses. Subsequently, even when his trades were small in size,
          he felt fear whenever he tried to short the market. The feelings associated
          with his loss came back as a conditioned response, inhibiting his trading.
          This is the dynamic behind the flashbacks that occur during post-traumatic
          stress: stimuli associated with the initial trauma trigger memories and feel-
          ings from that painful incident.
               The problem may have been just as severe had this trader made large
          money on the initial trade instead of losing. The emotional impact of a
          windfall profit, like the impact of a crack cocaine high, would bring its
          own conditioning, leading him to pursue similar gains (and highs) in future
          trades. It is poorly understood by traders that, psychologically, outsized
          gains are just as problematic as outsized losses. The fat tails of returns
          threaten fat tails of psychological response, interfering with sound percep-
          tion and decision-making.
               For this reason, when you’re your own trading coach, you don’t want
          patterns of extreme returns. Steady, consistent profits are far better for
          psychological performance than wild swings up and down, even though
