P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          294                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          overloaded by work responsibilities, tracking markets and themes day and
          night. If traders allow trading to consume them, they lose concentration
          and efficiency—and eventually that takes a toll on performance. Success-
          ful trading means knowing when to not trade and when to conserve and
          renew personal energy. Often, the best trading decision is the decision to
          take risk off and go on a holiday from markets. This reprieve can spark
          good thinking about markets and performance from the 30,000-foot view,
          aiding performance once trading commences.
               “A second important thing,” John Forman notes of his self-coaching, “is
          the commitment to performance improvement. That may seem to be an ob-
          vious thing, but it’s something easy to stray from at times. It’s often hard to
          not become complacent with one’s trading, especially when a level of suc-
          cess has been achieved. In order for the self-coaching to have any value,
          though, the realization that one can keep getting better, and the desire to
          do so, must be at the fore all the time.” I have noticed this time and again
          among the firms where I work. The best traders and portfolio managers
          seek out coaching when they’re doing well, not just when they’re losing.
          They have a continual drive for self-improvement; not just a temporary de-
          sire to remedy deficiencies.


              The measure of a trader is how hard he works on trading during
              winning periods.


               “Finally,” John concludes, “setting good goals and assessing how one is
          progressing toward them is critical. These are things coaches in other activ-
          ities like athletics do as external observers. The advantage there, however,
          is that they don’t have the direct link to the individual’s psyche, which com-
          plicates self-assessment. The most challenging aspect of this process for
          the individual is not allowing it to adversely impact one’s confidence level.
          That means the process needs to be as objective as possible, and the trader
          needs to be able to disconnect their ego from it.” Forman raises an excel-
          lent point here: goal setting and review must be pursued in a manner
          that does not damage confidence or motivation. Vague or distant goals of-
          fer insufficient feedback and learning; difficult goals can yield frustration.
          Tracking goals with a negative mindset—emphasizing shortfalls—makes
          self-coaching a punitive activity. The good self-coach, like the good athletic
          coach, uses goals to facilitate learning and build confidence. No one will
          sustain a process if, over time, it leads them to feel worse about themselves.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to conduct a self-assessment from
          30,000 feet. We’ve talked about tracking your trading, but now the goal is
          to track your self-coaching. Is trading fitting into your life, or do you find
          yourself fitting your life into the markets? Is most your time consumed
