P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         315

          labeled Data. The IDXDATA folder within Data contains spreadsheets with
          each instrument or piece of data (S&P 500 Index open-high-low-close; num-
          ber of NYSE stocks making 52-week highs) in its own spreadsheet. Once
          you open these sheets, you can highlight the data from the historical pe-
          riod you’re interested in, click on the Edit menu item in Excel, click on the
          Copy option, open a fresh, blank spreadsheet, click on Edit, and then click
          on the Paste option. By copying from the Pinnacle sheets and pasting into
          your own worksheets, you don’t modify your historical data files when you
          manipulate the data for your analyses.
               Personally, I would not subscribe to a data/charting service that did
          not facilitate an easy downloading of data into spreadsheets for analysis.
          It’s also helpful to have data services that carry a large amount of intraday
          and daily data on their servers, so that you can easily retrieve all the data
          you need from a single source. In general, I’ve found e-Signal and Pinnacle
          to be reliable clean sources of data. There are others out there, however,
          and I encourage you to shop around.


              When you download data for analysis, save your sheets in fold-
              ers that will help you organize your findings and give the sheets
              names that you’ll recognize. Over time, you’ll perform many analy-
              ses; saving and organizing your work will prevent you from having
              to reinvent wheels later.

               Once you have the data in your sheet, you’ll need to use formulas in Ex-
          cel to get the data into the form you need to examine patterns of interest.
          Formulas in Excel will begin with an = sign. If, for example, you wanted to
          calculate an average value for the first 10 periods of price data (where the
          earliest data are in row 2 and later data below), you might enter into the cell
          labeled D11: “=average(C2:C11),” without typing the quotation marks. That
          will give you the simple average (mean) of the price data in cells C1 through
          C10. If you want to create a moving average, you could simply click on the
          D10 cell, click the Excel menu item for copy, left-click your mouse and drag
          from cell D11 down, and release. Your column D cells will update the aver-
          age for each new cell in column C, creating a 10-period moving average.
               As a rule, each column in Excel (labeled with the letters) will rep-
          resent a variable of interest. Usually, my column A is date, column B is
          time (if I’m exploring intraday data), column C is open price, column D is
          high price, column E is low price, and column F is closing price. Column G
          might be devoted to volume data for each of those periods (if that’s part
          of what I’m investigating); columns H and above will be devoted to other
          variables of interest, such as the data series for another index or stock or
          the readings of a market indicator for that period. Each row of data is a
          time period, such as a day. Generally, my data are organized so that the
