P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          52                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Let’s say that I am short the S&P 500 index (SPY) and we get to a prior
          level of support. There is a bout of selling as the NYSE TICK moves sharply
          to −500. SPY hits a marginal new low for the move, but I notice that other
          indexes—the NASDAQ and Russell—are not making fresh lows. The −500
          TICK is well above the prior lows in the TICK for that move. I see signs
          that the selling is drying up. Nervously, I wait to see if any fresh selling will
          come into the market. My order to cover the position is ready to go, and
          my finger is poised over the mouse to execute the order. A few seconds
          go by and the market moves down a tick, up a tick, down a tick. Volume
          declines, my nervousness with the trade increases. In a flash, I act on my
          emotion and cover the position. The odds of the support holding, I decide,
          are too great to risk losing my profit in the trade.
               In this scenario—based on a trade I made just a day ago—fear was
          adaptive. There was a real danger out there. (The market subsequently
          moved significantly higher over the next half hour). I knew to trust my
          feelings and act on my fear, because I could point to specific sources of
          danger: the established support level, the drying up of volume and TICK,
          and the nonconfirmations from the Russell 2000 and NASDAQ 100 indexes.
          Years of experience with intraday trading told me that moves are unlikely
          to extend in the short run if they cannot carry the broad market with them
          on increasing downside participation (volume, TICK).


               Fear is the friend of trading when it points to genuine sources of
               danger: a felt discomfort with a trade will often precede conscious
               recognition of a change in market conditions.

               Note that had I identified fear as a negative emotion and tried to
          push past or ignore it, an important discretionary trading cue would have
          been lost. When you are your own trading coach, your goal is not to
          eliminate or even minimize emotion. Rather, your challenge is to extract
          the information that may underlie those emotions. This means being open
          to your emotional experience and, at times, trusting in that experience.
          Blind action based on emotion is a formula for disaster, particularly when
          what we’re feeling is anxiety and not reality-based fear. But to ignore emo-
          tional experience is equally fraught with peril. When you ignore feelings,
          you cannot have a feel for markets.
               So what do you do when nervousness enters your decision-making
          process?
               In The Psychology of Trading book, I liken such feelings to warning
          lights on the dashboard of a car. The nervous feeling is a warning, a sign
          that something isn’t right. When you see the light go on in your car, you
          don’t ignore it or cover it up with masking tape. Rather, you use the warning
          to figure out: What is wrong? What should I do about it? Depending on the
