P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         43


          LESSON 14: KEEP A PSYCHOLOGICAL
          JOURNAL

          When I first began trading, I kept a journal in the form of multiple annotated
          charts. I looked for every major turning point in the stock market and then
          investigated the patterns of indicators and price/volume patterns that could
          have alerted me to the changes in trend. After a while, I found that cer-
          tain patterns recurred. It was out of those early observations that I learned
          to rely on patterns of confirmation and disconfirmation among such mea-
          sures as the number of stocks making new highs versus lows, the NYSE
          TICK, and the various stock sectors. Later, as I gained new tools, such
          as Market Delta (www.marketdelta.com), I added to those patterns. For
          me, the journal was a tool for pattern recognition. Only after an extended
          time of recognizing patterns on charts, could I begin to see them unfold in
          real time. It was also only after an extended period of real-time observa-
          tion that I felt sufficiently confident to actually place trades based on those
          patterns.
               When we keep a psychological journal, the learning principles are not
          so different. At first, the journal is simply a tool for recognizing our own
          patterns as traders. These include:
            r Behavioral patterns—Tendencies to act in particular ways in given
              situations.
            r Emotional patterns—Tendencies to enter particular moods or states
              in reaction to particular events.
            r Cognitive patterns—Tendencies to enter into specific thinking pat-
              terns or frames of mind in the face of personal or market-related situa-
              tions.

               Many of our trading patterns are amalgamations of the three patterns:
          in response to our immediate environment, we tend to think, feel, and act a
          certain way. Sometimes these characteristic patterns work against our best
          interests. They lead us to make rash decisions and/or interfere with our
          best market analysis and planning. It is in such situations that we look to a
          journal (and other psychological exercises) to help us change our patterns
          of distress.


              For more on keeping trading journals: http://traderfeed.blogspot.
              com/2008/03/formatting-your-trading-journal-for.html

              But why do such patterns exist? Why would a person repeat an
          unfulfilling pattern of thought and behavior again and again, even when
