P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                       79


          and your trading mode (active/planned or passive/unplanned). Add a sim-
          ple checklist to your trading journal to help you see the correlations among
          your physical state, your concentration level, your intentionality, and your
          trading results.


              If you lack energy, you will lack focus; if you lack focus, you’ll lack
              intentionality; if you lack intentionality, you’ll lack the ability to
              follow trading plans.


               Unless you calculate and appreciate these correlations for yourself,
          you’re unlikely to sustain the motivation to address—with consistency—
          the five areas above. Once you see that your energy level is directly corre-
          lated with the quality of your trading (and with your trading results), you
          will prod yourself to build a daily routine that addresses sleep, eating, ex-
          ercise, and a healthy lifestyle. You’ll also be able to overcome guilt or fear
          over leaving the screen and realize that opportunity is not just a function
          of moving markets: it’s also a function of your ability to capitalize upon
          those markets.

                      COACHING CUE

          Many traders neglect their family lives (spouse, children) in their absorption into
          their work. The resulting guilt and distraction from those unmet needs wind up
          interfering more with performance than the time it would have taken to spend
          the quality hours together. The mental rejuvenation from vacations—even week-
          end holidays—can renew family relationships and energize work. If you’re too
          worn down for your personal life, you’re probably not operating with good eﬃ-
          ciency in your trading. It’s not necessary to have a totally balanced life—few of
          us do—but if your life feels unbalanced, that will undermine energy, concentra-
          tion, optimism, and eﬀort.




          LESSON 25: INTENTION AND
          GREATNESS: EXERCISE THE BRAIN
          THROUGH PLAY

          One of the core concepts underlying The Psychology of Trading book is in-
          tentionality. We can define intentionality as the ability to sustain purposeful
          activity over time. The ability to sustain attention and concentration, coor-
          dinate a sequence of activities toward a chosen end, and persistently try
          different approaches toward solving a problem until a solution is reached:
          all of these are manifestations of intentionality.
