P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          193

          making the market come to me, I found that I greatly reduced the heat I
          took on trades, maximizing profits. “The market has to come to me,” be-
          came one of my cognitive best practices.
               Your assignment is to identify the ways of thinking that put you into
          your best trades and that enable you to manage risk most effectively. Once
          you identify how you think at your best, you have a model that you can
          replicate day after day in your trading, turning virtues into positive habits.
          You don’t have to be mired in cognitive distortions to benefit from a cog-
          nitive journal. Use the journal as a discovery tool for your best practices.
          It’s an exercise even the most experienced, successful traders can benefit
          from.



                     COACHING CUE

          A trader I worked with used the phrase make them pay (and other, choice col-
          orful phrases) when he saw that the longs or shorts were overextended in a
          market. He would not exit until he saw evidence of high-volume puking from
          the traders running from cover. The idea of make them pay engaged his com-
          petitive instinct and kept him in winning trades. Frequently, he would add to
          his position on retracements, eager to make them pay even more. You may ﬁnd
          that you use similar phrases during your best trades. Cement those phrases
          into cognitive patterns that you can rehearse. The phrases keep you grounded
          in best practices.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the topic
          of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter 6: http://
          becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-coach-
          chapter-six-links.html
              More material on cognitive approaches to change can be found in my
          chapter on “Cognitive Techniques for Enhancing Performance” in Enhanc-
          ing Trader Performance. See also the chapter on “Cognitive Therapy: In-
          troduction to Theory and Practice” by Judith S. Beck and Peter J. Bieling
          in The Art and Science of Brief Psychotherapies (American Psychiatric
          Press, 2004). Of additional interest might be the article “Remapping the
          Mind” from the articles section of my personal site: www.brettsteenbarger.
          com/articles.htm
