P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         37


          work harder, learn more, and grow your trading account over time. That
          doesn’t mean repealing stress; it means creating active firewalls between
          stress and distress. Risk management is one of the best psychological fire-
          walls of all.



                     COACHING CUE

          Plan for every possible glitch in your trading: if your broker can’t be reached;
          if you lose your online connection; if your equipment fails; if your data vendor
          goes down. My own trading station is small, but there is redundancy in each
          of these areas. I have multiple brokers, multiple online connections, multiple
          computers, and multiple data streams. There’s always a rehearsed Plan B if
          something fails when I have a position on. The glitches still cause stress, but
          not distress.




          LESSON 12: ANTIDOTES FOR TOXIC
          TRADING ASSUMPTIONS

          What we expect from life shapes our emotional experience. If we expect
          good things, we tend to be optimistic and energetic. If we expect negative
          outcomes, we tend to feel anxiety. If we expect that success will elude
          us, we’ll feel discouraged and depressed. If we expect perfection, we’ll be
          continually disappointed with reality.
              To no small degree, our emotions are barometers of the degree to
          which we are meeting or falling short of our expectations. That is an
          important principle, because psychological research suggests that, if our
          expectations are biased, we’re likely to experience skewed emotions.
              The relationship between emotion and expectation is particularly
          important for the developing trader. If you are your own trading coach,
          one of your overriding priorities is to foster the kind of positive experi-
          ence that will sustain your motivation and learning efforts. Discouraged,
          defeated, and fearful learners are not effective learners. If you are going
          to maintain that zone of focus and concentration that maximizes learning
          efforts, you have to be absorbed in markets. No one can be absorbed if
          they’re also battling emotional distress.
              In the spirit of Ayn Rand, who encouraged people to “check their
          premises” when they arrived at contradictory conclusions (“I should be
          happy” but “I shouldn’t be selfish”), I’ll now ask you to check your
          expectations—particularly if you’re finding that distress is interfering with
