P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          26                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               A trader recently called and expressed frustration with his perfor-
          mance. Markets were moving well and, for the most part, he was catch-
          ing the direction correctly. He entered positions aggressively, but then was
          stopped out at the worst times when the market made sharp, short coun-
          tertrend moves. When we reviewed his trading statistics, we found that his
          average win size exceeded his average loser, but that he had many more
          losing trades than winners. The steady drumbeat of losing trades was erod-
          ing his self-confidence.
               So what was the problem?
               Our trader was waiting for markets to begin moving in the anticipated
          direction and then entering with full size. By the time he lifted an offer or
          hit a bid, the market had already made a short-term move and was ripe
          for profit taking by scalpers. His full size made these countertrend moves
          intolerable, and his risk management rules ensured that he had no stay-
          ing power with his ideas. The market was controlling him; he was not in
          control of his trading. The loss of self-confidence was inevitable.
               The key to regaining self-confidence in such a situation is to turn
          the focus from making (or losing) money to the actual process of trad-
          ing. We initiated a simple unit-sizing rule in which the trader could only
          enter positions with one unit (his maximum size was three units). If the
          position went his way, but then experienced a normal retracement, he
          added a second unit. If the position did not go his way, he maintained a
          defined stop-loss point and ensured a minimal loss, given that his size was
          one-third his maximum. The trader could not control the market’s move-
          ment, but he could control his position sizing. This process focus promoted
          a sense of self-efficacy, which was essential to recapturing his confidence.


               You control how you trade; the market controls how and when
               you’ll get paid.


               This is one reason that trading with rules is so important. You can’t
          control your P/L statement, but you can control whether you adhere to
          trading rules. Your focus becomes one of trading well, not one of making
          money. Every rule followed—every market traded well—is a success ex-
          perience in the process sense. Over time, profits result (as long as the rules
          are sound!), but the confidence comes from self-mastery.
               Another powerful source of self-efficacy is preparation. When you pre-
          pare your trading ideas for the day or week, you generate a sense of mental
          mastery. This is particularly the case when your preparation includes what-
          if scenarios that guide your decision-making under a variety of market pos-
          sibilities. Successful experience is a powerful source of mastery, and the
          mental rehearsal of trading plans under various contingencies generates
