P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          334                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          such intraday patterns, I strongly recommend obtaining a clean database
          from a vendor such as Tick Data. You can use their data management soft-
          ware to create data points at any periodicity and download these easily to
          Excel. Serious, longer-term investigations of historical intraday data need
          tools far stronger than Excel. Limits to the size of spreadsheets and the
          ease of maneuvering them make it impossible to use Excel for long-term
          investigations of high frequency data.
               Still, when you want to see how markets behave in the short run—say,
          in the first hour of trading after a large gap open—investigations with in-
          traday data and filtering can be quite useful. You’ll find interesting patterns
          of continuation and reversal to set up day-trading ideas or to help with the
          execution of longer timeframe trades.


                     COACHING CUE

          Filtering can be useful for examining patterns of returns as a function of time
          of day. For instance, say the market is down over the past two hours: how do
          returns compare if those two hours are the ﬁrst versus the last two hours of the
          day? How are returns over the next few hours impacted if the day prior to those
          two hours was down? Such analyses can be very helpful for intraday traders,
          particularly when you combine price change independent variables with such
          intraday predictors as NYSE TICK.




          LESSON 100: MAKE USE OF
          YOUR FINDINGS

          This chapter has provided only a sampling of the kinds of ways that you
          can use simple spreadsheets and formulas to investigate possible patterns
          in historical data. Remember: these are qualitative looks at the data; they
          are designed to generate hypotheses, not prove them. Manipulating data
          and looking at them from various angles is a skill just like executing trades.
          With practice and experience, you can get to the point where you investi-
          gate quite a few patterns all in the hour or two after market close or before
          they open.
              The key is to identify what makes the current market unique or dis-
          tinctive. Are we well below or above a moving average? Have there been
          many more new lows than highs or the reverse? Has one sector been un-
          usually strong or weak? Have the previous days been strong or weak? It
          is often at the extremes—when indicators or patterns are at their most
          unusual—that we find the greatest potential edges. But sometimes those
