P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          252                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          stop-loss point captures the amount of adverse movement we’re willing to
          incur prior to exiting the trade and declaring our hypothesis wrong.
                The trader who lacks clearly defined targets and stop-losses is like the
          scientist who lacks a clear hypothesis. You can trade to see what happens,
          and scientists can play around in the laboratory, but neither is science and
          neither is likely to prove profitable over the long run. A firm hypothesis
          and objective criteria for accepting or rejecting the hypothesis advances
          knowledge. Similarly, a clear trading idea and explicit criteria for validating
          or rejecting the idea can guide our market understanding. Frequently, if
          you get stopped out of a seemingly good trade idea you can reframe your
          understanding of what is going on in the market. After all, scientists learn
          from hypotheses that are not confirmed as well as those that are.
                With the target and stop-loss firmly in mind, we now have the basis for
          executing our idea. Good execution mandates that we enter the trade at a
          price in which the amount of money we would lose if we were wrong (if
          we’re stopped out) is less than the amount of money that we would make
          if we were right (if we reach our target). When traders talk about getting a
          good price, this is what they mean: they are entering an idea with relatively
          little risk and a good deal more potential reward. A good way to think about
          this is to think of each trade as a hand of poker: where we place our stop-
          loss level reflects how much we’re willing to bet on a particular idea.


              Many traders make the mistake of placing stops at a particular dol-
              lar loss level. Rather, you want to place stops at levels that clearly
              tell you that your trade idea is wrong.


               Let’s say my research tells me that we have an excellent chance of
          breaking above the prior day’s high price of $51 per share. We are currently
          trading a bit below $49 after two bouts of morning selling took the stock
          down to $48, which is above the prior day’s low of $47.50. A news item
          favorable to the sector hits the tape and I immediately buy the stock at $49,
          with $51 as my immediate target. My hypothesis is that this news will be
          a catalyst for propelling the stock higher, given that earlier selling could
          not take out yesterday’s low. I’m willing to lose a point on the trade (stop
          myself out at $48) to make two points on the idea (target of $51).
               Suppose, however, that the stock was trading at $50, rather than $49
          when the news came out. Now my risk/reward is not weighted in my favor.
          If I’m willing to accept a move back to $48 before concluding I’m wrong, I
          now have two points of potential loss for a single point of targeted profit.
          While the idea is the same, the execution is quite different. It is difficult to
          make money over the long haul if you’re consistently risking two dollars
