P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 29, 2008   13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          206                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r Number of diversified (uncorrelated) trade ideas.
            r Quality of entries (favorable risk/reward for trades; low amount of heat
              taken per trade).
            r Sizing/management of trades (scaling in/out by planned criteria).
            r Execution of exits (following profit targets/stop losses).

               Each journal entry then focuses on what you did right in each of those
          categories each week. You write down, in specific detail, your best per-
          formance in each of these areas and then you review your entries before
          trading the next week, with the aim of continuing the positives.
               As the previous lesson noted, this use of positive reinforcement and
          shaping is even more powerful if you conduct your assessment in a so-
          cial framework, where you exchange your weekly positive report cards
          with one or more valued peers. This framework allows you to support the
          progress of others, even as they reward yours.
               One of the better pieces of self-coaching from early in my trading ca-
          reer occurred when I set a goal of reaching a certain size in my trading
          account. I normally don’t emphasize P/L goals, but in this case I wanted
          a tangible focus on steady profitability. Once I reached the goal, my com-
          mitment was to withdraw a portion of money from the trading account
          and use it for something enjoyable for the family. This emphasis rewarded
          my longer-term progress, but also brought my family into the positive rein-
          forcement. When I finish this book, one of my personal goals will be to lose
          some weight—long hours in airplanes and hotels between working with
          traders have taken their toll. I’ve promised myself a new wardrobe from a
          Chicago tailor if I reach my weight goals. Each week I’ll be weighing myself
          and tracking my progress. With every opportunity to snack, I’ll be thinking
          about that new wardrobe and how I would feel if I didn’t make weight that
          week. There’s little doubt in my mind that I’ll reach my goal.


              Tangible rewards for your success are among the strongest posi-
              tive reinforcers.

               The key to making a positive journal work is shaping. At first, you
          jot down entries for even very small things that you did right. Later, you
          only make notations of larger examples of virtuous trading. If you conduct
          the shaping process properly, you’ll always have good things to write
          about—even on losing days. This process ensures that you’re always learn-
          ing, always building on strengths, always keeping your motivation up. The
          difficult part about self-coaching isn’t just making progress, it’s sustaining
          the progress. Progress is much easier to accomplish when your focus is
          building yourself up, not tearing yourself down.
