P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                            295

          with trading, or are you spending at least equal time in performance
          improvement—the reviews and research of markets and trades—and the
          routines that help you develop new ideas and hone skills? How much of
          your efforts are goal-focused, and how much are you drifting from day to
          day? Do you get down to the hard business of grading your performance
          and tracking your ebbs and flows, and do you use this information to guide
          your risk-taking? In short, if you’re going to be a good self-coach, you have
          to be as aware of your own coaching performance as your trading results.
          The value of such meta-coaching—training yourself to be a better mentor
          of yourself—is a key lesson we can take away from Ray and John.


                      COACHING CUE

          Just as you can develop a report card on your trading to track your progress, you
          can grade your self-coaching eﬀorts by assessing how much time you spend in
          self-coaching mode; how clearly you set goals for yourself; and how well you
          sustain work toward those goals. You can’t develop as a trader without working
          on trading skills, and you can’t develop as your own coach without working on
          your coaching skills.




          LESSON 89: A VIEW FROM THE
          TRADING FIRMS

          Mike Bellafiore is a partner at SMB Capital, a proprietary trading firm in
          New York City that specializes in the short-term trading of individual eq-
          uities. He is also a successful trader and a mentor of traders within the
          firm. Most recently, SMB has extended its training to the trading public
          via a blog (www.smbtraining.com/blog) and a formal trading curriculum.
          I had the pleasure of visiting SMB Capital and was impressed by Mike,
          Steve Spencer, and the others in the firm. There was a good buzz on the
          trading floor throughout the day as traders shared ideas and breaking
          developments.
               Larry Fisher is a co-owner of Trading RM, a proprietary trading firm in
          Chicago that specializes in trading individual stocks and options on those
          stocks (http://tradingrm.com). Larry and his partner Reid Valfer started
          the firm with the desire of providing a mentoring and teaching environ-
          ment for traders. An unusual feature of the firm is that Larry and Reid
          call out all their trades, illustrating to their traders what they’re doing
          throughout the day. Teaching and mentorship are thus woven into the fab-
          ric of daily trading. In visiting Trading RM, I was impressed by the learning
