P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                     21

              What has happened in this scenario? Anxiety has interfered with my
          performance, turning a good trading plan into bad trading. But the anxiety
          has nothing to do with the behavior of the market: the market did abso-
          lutely nothing to disconfirm my idea. Indeed, when the buy program lifted
          the index futures briefly, the market was giving me a perfect opportunity
          to add a second unit to my trade! Not only did I miss an opportunity to
          profit from a good idea, I also missed an opportunity to hit a home run.
          Often, keeping losing trades small and hitting those few home runs gener-
          ates profitability over the long run.


              Many traders’ problems show up in how they handle opportunity,
              not loss.

               Sometimes anxiety is a legitimate and appropriate response to a mar-
          ket that behaves in violent and unexpected ways. After all, as I note in
          the blog, anxiety is our body’s adaptive response to perceived danger. But
          danger can be a function of perception, not objective reality. I begin my
          trade immersed in market activity, framing hypotheses and executing an
          idea well. At some point, however, my thoughts veer from the present
          market and instead focus on how much money I’ve lost during the week
          thus far. That focus on loss creates a sense of danger and threat. Instead
          of responding to the market, I’m now reacting to my own concerns re-
          garding profitability. My thought process has taken me out of the market
          immersion—and ultimately takes me out of my game.
               In a cool, calm moment, I can see clearly that the validity of my trade
          idea/plan has absolutely nothing to do with how I’ve traded the past several
          days. If I introduce worries over profitability into my trading, however,
          I’ve now allowed the viewing to affect the doing. I’m no longer absorbed in
          the market; my focus is gone. I’m responding to my own uncertainties and
          insecurities.
               How can we change our focus and stay grounded in our plans and in
          objective market activity? The first step is to recognize our triggers. These
          are the performance thoughts and worries that typically intrude during
          trading. Concerns over profitability are one trigger; excitement over antici-
          pated profits could be another. Anything that gets you thinking about how
          well or poorly you’re doing while you’re doing it is a trigger that can nudge
          you out of your zone. When you know your triggers, you’re in a much better
          position to intercept them when they occur and treat them the same way
          you would treat any ordinary distraction, such as road noise outside your
          window.
               In other words, it’s not the thoughts of performance that take you
          away from your focus, but your identification with those thoughts. This
