P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          273


              the trade play out,” Trevor explains. “Fortunately I had the discipline
              to work my way out of the trade and try over.” This is an excellent
              point: discipline doesn’t mean not making mistakes; it means mak-
              ing mistakes the right way. Particularly when you’re building your
              competence and confidence, it’s important to learn how to “work your
              way out of the trade.” Positive experience can build optimism, but it’s
              the ability to work out of difficult situations that yields the confidence
              that you can handle most anything the market can throw your way.


              First and foremost, good traders are good risk managers.


              Michael described his three most valuable steps in self-coaching as: 1)
          keeping a detailed trading journal; 2) becoming an amateur trading psy-
          chologist; and 3) listening to trading affirmations. This reflects a balance
          that I see among many experienced, successful traders: always working on
          their trading, and always working on themselves.

              Keeping a Journal
              “The thing that’s helped my development the most,” Michael explains,
              “is keeping a proper, detailed trading journal. I’ve always prided myself
              on my ability to remember and learn things solely by memory. Writing
              things down just seemed like unnecessary work . . . That all changed a
              few years ago when I hit a rough spot and decided to reassess things.
              I went back to basics and did things according to the advice of what
              I’d read in all those books over the years—mainly create a detailed
              business plan and keep a journal. In just a few weeks of keeping a de-
              tailed journal, a few self-defeating behaviors jumped out at me. I was
              amazed at how those behaviors never registered with me previously.
              For example, I discovered that I had a bad habit of adjusting my initial
              stop-losses too soon. That often resulted in stopping myself out of win-
              ning trades at breakeven. Fixing that one thing has added considerably
              to my bottom line.”
                   I have experienced the same thing: in keeping records of my trad-
              ing, I learn things about my performance that I had never recognized
              earlier. Often, it’s just a few tweaks to what you’re doing that makes
              the difference between breakeven and profit.


              The advice you see repeated in one trading book after another is
              often the best advice, because it’s the result of years of experience.
