P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          254                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 79: THINK IN THEMES—
          GENERATING GOOD TRADING IDEAS

          Notice how successful businesses are always coming up with new products
          and services to meet the changing needs and demands of consumers. A
          great way to become obsolescent in the business world is to remain static.
          If a current product is a hit, competitors and imitators are sure to follow.
          What was hot at one time—large vehicles during periods of cheap gaso-
          line, compact disc players for music—can go cold quite suddenly when
          economic conditions or technologies change.
               It is the same way in the trading world. For a while, buying technol-
          ogy stocks was a sure road to success. Thousands of day traders gave up
          their jobs to seek their fortunes. After 2000, that trade vanished with a se-
          vere bear market. Now, selected technology firms are doing relatively well,
          while others languish. Markets, like consumer tastes, are never static.
               As we saw in the lesson on diversification, if you base your trading
          business on a single type of trading—a limited set of ideas or patterns—it
          is a vulnerable place to be. I recall when breakouts of opening ranges were
          profitable trades; in recent years, those breakouts have tended to reverse.
          We all hear that the trend is your friend, but in recent years buying after los-
          ing days, weeks, and months has—on average—been more profitable than
          selling. Market patterns, as Niederhoffer emphasized, are ever-changing.
          That means that successful traders, like successful business people, must
          continually scout for fresh opportunity.


              The best system developers don’t just develop and trade a single
              system. Rather, they continually test and trade new systems as part
              of a diversified mix.

               One of the skills I see in the best traders is the ability to synthesize
          data across markets, asset classes, and time frames to generate trading
          themes. These themes are narratives that the trader constructs to make
          sense of what is going on in markets. These themes are the trader’s theories
          of the financial marketplace. Their trades are tests of these theories. The
          successful trader is one who generates and acts on good theories: themes
          that truly capture what is happening and why.
               This thematic thinking is common in the portfolio management world,
          but I see it also among successful short-term traders. The scope of the
          theories—and the data used to generate them—may differ, but the process
          is remarkably similar. A portfolio manager might note high gasoline prices
          and weakening housing values and conclude that a lack of discretionary
          income among consumers should hurt consumer discretionary stocks.
          That might lead to a trade in which the manager shorts the consumer
