P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          44                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          she is aware of the consequences? Sometimes traders are so frustrated
          with their repeated, negative patterns that they swear that they are sabo-
          taging their own success. This pejorative labeling of the problem, however,
          doesn’t help the situation. It only serves to blame the frustrated trader,
          magnifying frustrations.
               As I stressed in my Psychology of Trading book, maladaptive patterns
          generally begin as adaptations to challenging situations. We learned par-
          ticular ways of coping with difficult events and those, at first, may work for
          us. As a result, these patterns become overlearned: they are internalized as
          habit patterns.
               A good example is the tendency to blame oneself when there are
          conflicts with others. A child in a home fraught with arguing and fighting
          might adapt to the situation best by blaming himself for problems rather
          than risk conflict by blaming others. Later in life, with that pattern in-
          grained, even normal conflicts may trigger self-blame and depressed mood.
          Such a person, for example, might spend more time and energy beating up
          on himself after a losing day than learning from his losses.
               When we repeat patterns in trading that consistently lose us money
          or opportunity, the odds are good that we are replaying coping strategies
          from an earlier phase of life: one that helped us in a prior situation
          but which we’ve long since outgrown. The task, then, is to unlearn these
          patterns—and that is where the psychological journal becomes useful.
               Just as I used the trading journal to become keenly aware of market
          patterns, our psychological journal can alert us to the repetitive patterns
          of thinking, feeling, and acting that interfere with sound decision-making.
          Such a journal, like the annotated charts that I mentioned, begins with ob-
          servation: we want to review our trading day and notice all of the patterns
          that affected our trading. The initial goal is not to change those patterns.
          Rather, we simply want to become better at recognizing the patterns, so
          that we’ll eventually learn to identify their appearance in real time.


               The psychological journal is a tool for developing your internal
               observer: learning to recognize what you’re doing, when you’re
               doing it.

              A favorite journal format that I use divides a normal piece of paper
          into three columns. The first column describes the specific situation in the
          markets. The second column summarizes the thoughts, feelings, and/or ac-
          tions taken in response to the situation. The third column highlights the
          consequences of the particular cognitive, emotional, or action patterns.
              The first two columns help us recognize the situational triggers for our
          patterns. This makes us more sensitive to their appearance over time. The
          third column emphasizes in our mind the negative consequences to our
