P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         147


                     COACHING CUE

          Coaches typically address their teams before a game to emphasize important
          lessons and build motivation. Consider addressing yourself before the start of
          market days, stressing your plans and goals for the session. Tape record your
          address and then review it midday. Pay particular attention to how you speak
          to yourself: it’s much harder to lapse into negativity when you take the time to
          make your self-talk explicit and then approach that self-talk from the perspec-
          tive of a listener.




          LESSON 46: FIND POSITIVE
          TRADING RELATIONSHIPS

          Why do people hire a personal trainer to help them get into shape when
          they already know which exercises they should be doing? Why does a
          hedge fund hire a coach to work with experienced portfolio managers,
          when those managers know far more about the business than the coach?
          Why do elite athletes who have more skills than anyone they could possibly
          hire still rely on performance coaches?
               An understanding of the psychodynamics of personal change makes
          the answers to these questions perfectly clear. In each case, hiring a coach
          or trainer takes an individual development process and turns it into an in-
          terpersonal process. This is one of the most powerful steps anyone can
          take toward accelerating their learning curves, but it is poorly understood.
               When you pursue a goal with other people, you add a new source of
          motivation to your efforts. We know from the research in psychology that
          the most important ingredient in counseling and therapy outcomes is the
          quality of the relationship between the client and the helper. This makes
          sense: when the helper is valued, the client wants to not only make changes
          for himself, but also for the counselor. You don’t want to let down someone
          you value and who’s working for you. If you decide to go to the gym every
          other day to work out and get into shape, it’s easy to skip a day here or
          there. But if you make that commitment with a close friend, you won’t
          want to disappoint that person. You’re more likely to stick to your plans.

              Making a commitment to change to others adds a layer of motiva-
              tion and helps the other person motivate you.

              Bring another person into change efforts and you will introduce a new
          source of mirroring. A good athletic trainer will provide you with feedback
