P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          62                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          experience day after day, week after week, and you can see how frustra-
          tion would build. Out of that frustration, traders may double up on posi-
          tions, even as opportunity is drying up. I’ve seen traders lose significant
          sums solely because of this dynamic.
               Alternatively, the trader who is calibrated to lower volatility environ-
          ments will place stops relatively close to entries to manage risk. As mar-
          kets gain volatility, they will blow through those stops—even as the trade
          eventually turns out to be right. Once again, the likely emotional result is
          frustration and potential disruption of trading discipline.
               Both of these are excellent and all-too-common examples of how poor
          trading can be the cause of trading distress. It may look as though frustra-
          tion is causing the loss of discipline—and to a degree that is true—but an
          equally important part of the picture is that the failure to adjust to market
          volatility creates the initial frustration. Any invariant set of rules for stops,
          targets, and position sizing—in other words, rules that don’t take market
          volatility into account and adjust accordingly—will produce wildly differ-
          ent results as market volatility shifts. For that reason, the market’s changes
          in volatility can create emotional volatility. We become reactive to markets,
          because we don’t adjust to what those markets are doing.


               Poor trading practice—poor execution, risk management, and
               trade management—is responsible for much emotional distress.
               Trading affects our psychology as much as psychology affects our
               trading.


               Personality research suggests that each of us, based on our traits, pos-
          sess different levels of financial risk tolerance. Our risk appetites are ex-
          pressed in how we size positions, but also in the markets we trade. When
          markets move from high to low volatility, they can frustrate the aggressive
          trader. When they shift from low to high volatility, they become threaten-
          ing for risk-averse traders. The volatility of markets contributes to volatil-
          ity of mood because the potential risks and rewards of any given trade
          change meaningfully. In the example from my blog post, that shift oc-
          curred within the span of just a few months.
               Note that traders can experience the same problem when they shift
          from trading one market to another—such as moving from trading the S&P
          500 market to the oil market—or when they shift from trading one stock
          to another. Day traders of individual equities will often track stocks on
          a watch list and move quickly from sector to sector, trading shares with
          different volatility patterns. Unless they adjust their stops, targets, and po-
          sition sizes accordingly, they can easily frustrate themselves as trades get
