P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              235

          leverages your trading productivity, as you now can generate profits from
          many centers instead of a very few.
               There are many ways of diversifying your trading business. If you are
          an intraday trader, you’ll be diversified by trading long and short and by
          allocating your trades to different stock names and/or sectors. You may
          also hold some positions overnight, creating a degree of diversification by
          time frame as well. If you are trading over a longer time frame, you may
          trade different markets or strategies, each with different holding periods.
               The key, for the trader as well as the café, is to make sure that diversi-
          fication truly adds diversity. Adding tea to a coffee menu did not achieve
          adequate diversification for the café. Adding a Dow trade to an S&P 500
          trade similarly fails to add unique value. Your diversification should pro-
          vide a truly independent and reliable income stream. When the coffee busi-
          ness is slow, for example, customers may come to the café for a bite to
          eat. This keeps the flow of customers strong through the day. Similarly,
          when one of your trading strategies is drawing down, other ones that are
          not correlated can sustain the flow of profits to your account.
               Of course, when you diversify, you need to make sure you stay within
          your range of expertise. Adding fresh entrées to a menu would make lit-
          tle sense for a café owner who lacked cooking skills. Similarly, it doesn’t
          help your profitability as a trader to add strategies that are not well tested
          and known to be successful. Diversification only makes sense when it adds
          unique value to what you’re already doing.
               Many beginning traders think they’ll find a way of trading that is prof-
          itable and then trade that for a career. Rarely are markets so accommo-
          dating. If a café brings in a huge number of customers, you can be sure
          competitors will soon follow. If a trading strategy is successful, it will find
          wide interest. Successful businesses must always innovate, staying ahead
          of the competitive curve. Adding new sources of revenue to exploit chang-
          ing markets is essential to long-term survival.
               I cannot emphasize this strongly enough: markets change. Edges in
          markets disappear. Trends change. The participants in markets change.
          The themes that drive markets change. The levels of volatility and risk
          in markets change. I have heard many promoters hype trading methods
          that they claim are successful in all markets, but I have yet to see docu-
          mentation of such success. Every trader I have known who has sustained a
          long, successful career has evolved over time, just as successful businesses
          evolve with changing consumer tastes and economic conditions. Quite a
          few traders I’ve known who have been successful with a single method
          have failed to sustain that success when that strategy no longer fit market
          conditions (momentum trading of tech stocks in the late 1990s) or when it
          became so overcrowded that the edge disappeared (scalping ticks on the
          S&P 500 index by reading and gaming order flow). It’s difficult to learn how
          to trade; even harder to unlearn old ways and cultivate new ones.
