P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           265


           4. Accepting that I alone am responsible.
           5. There is no holy grail.
           6. Having trust in myself.
           7. Being able to stand up again, after being beaten down.
           8. Being lucky from time to time.
           9. Keeping a trading journal and writing a blog.
         10. Don’t panic.


              Building the External Observer
              “The external observer is a concept I came across after reading your
              first book,” Chris explains. “It allows me to see myself trading, to ob-
              serve and interact in case I’m in a position from a teacher’s perspective.
              It allows me to argue about my trade, to see the pros and cons, to no-
              tice price behavior I might miss otherwise. It’s an invaluable resource
              in a trade because it is not affected by emotions and will guide me,
              even in a fast-moving market. I rely on it to always know what I should
              do. I might override it, but it is the clear voice in a turbulent market,
              where I can always turn to find the safe way out.”

              Maintaining Discipline
              “Discipline is so elusive, so difficult to maintain, and yet it is something
              without which you won’t succeed at trading,” Chris explains. “Am I a
              disciplined trader? Alas no, unfortunately not, but after all these years
              I have learned that I have to follow certain rules or I will do a lot of
              damage to my account. Let’s look at a concept that every trading book
              tells you is wrong and will lead to disaster: adding to a losing posi-
              tion. Admit it, you have done it at times, because you were certain that
              you were right and the market was wrong. My biggest loss came from
              adding to a losing position; still on a range day, adding to a losing po-
              sition is the way to trade, because otherwise, you will die the death
              of a thousand stops. Yes I add to losing positions, but now I have the
              discipline to stick to the twice wrong and I’m out rule. Meaning, if the
              add-on does not work, I’m out. Of course you can be wrong and a trade
              signal might go against you, but if you have two signals in a row that
              go against you, then you have to take a step back and see why your
              signals aren’t working properly.”


              Rules promote discipline.
