P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          262                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          but his distinct specialty is the design of trading systems. Henry eats his
          own cooking: he builds and trades his own systems, manages money for
          clients with his systems, and develops trading systems for other traders
          and trading firms. When I posed the question to him of what he has found
          most helpful in coaching himself, he quickly offered three responses:

           1. Leveraging core competencies and interests
           2. Learning about learning
           3. Collaboration and work ethic

              Let’s take a look at each.
              From childhood, Henry learned about building and the use of machin-
          ery from his grandfather, Floyd Grahm. “I am, and have always been, a
          heavy equipment operator,” Henry observes. Out of his fascination with
          machines and moving things around, Henry tried his hand at a different
          kind of building: he built a machine that traded. After building several
          such machines, he figured out a way to quantify rates of change in market
          behavior. When he tossed aside all but one of his machines, Henry devel-
          oped others, so that his machines would never rust and become obsolete.
          His core competence and interest is building: markets just happen to be the
          earth he is currently moving. Henry leveraged what he knows and loves and
          found success and fulfillment.


              Success is found by leveraging distinctive interests, talents, and
              skills: doing what you love, and doing what you do well.


              Note, however, that the flip side of building is destroying. Sometimes
          you have to take down a structure to erect a new one; you have to remove a
          mound of earth to lay a foundation for something new. It was Henry’s will-
          ingness to put aside his old machines and develop new ones that provided
          him with his edge. It’s not about finding a perfect system and taking cash
          from it like an ATM. It’s about having the integrity to acknowledge when
          ideas are no longer working and having the desire to be the best machine
          operator possible.
              With respect to learning about learning, Henry credits his chess lessons
          with grandmaster Nigel Davies for helping him become sensitive to pat-
          terns and their nuances. “What I learned from those lessons was the power
          of nuance—the cascading insights brought by experience and the contin-
          uous pursuit of a single objective,” he explains. Henry has learned to scan
          markets like he scans a chessboard for moves. “I continually search for the
          next insight now, the nuance that means just a bit of an edge for just a little
          while longer.”
