P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          146                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               One trader I work with actually talks to himself in the third person
          when he is in his self-coaching mode, reviewing his goals and perfor-
          mance in tape recordings that he then replays during breaks in the day.
          He might say, “Bill, today you need to be alert for your temptation to
          overtrade this market. That got you into trouble last week. We’re coming
          up to a Fed announcement and it’s unlikely that the market is going to
          move much until that’s out of the way. Let’s make sure you do it right this
          week!”
               Day after day, listening to messages such as this, turns intentional
          coaching talk into internalized self-talk. After a long period of saying the
          right things, you’ll start to feel them and repeat them to yourself auto-
          matically. The coaching role, at that point, has truly become part of you.
          Conversely, if your self-coaching voice is one of frustration, you are culti-
          vating a relationship with yourself that can only rob you of motivation and
          confidence over time. Many traders think they are pushing themselves to
          succeed when, in fact, all they are doing is replaying critical, hostile voices
          from past relationships.
               One trader I worked with would make significant money with many
          more winning trades than losing ones, but you would never know it from
          the way he talked. He always focused on the losing trades, the trades that
          he could have left on longer for greater profits, and the trades he could
          have exited sooner. The basic message of his talk was that anything he did
          was not good enough. When it came time for him to increase his risk and
          pursue larger profits, he hit the wall and could not make the change. Days,
          weeks, and months of telling himself that his trading was not good enough
          undercut his ability to be confident trading large size. He thought he was
          coaching himself for success by refusing to be content with his gains, but
          in reality he was wounding his self-esteem.
               A far different approach to self-coaching was exemplified by the trader
          who set challenging, but reachable, performance goals and then promised
          himself (and his wife) a long-awaited vacation abroad if he reached those
          goals. When he recruited his spouse into his efforts to improve his trad-
          ing and chose an incentive that meant a great deal to both of them, he
          was able to sustain a positive motivation. This made their trip especially
          rewarding, as it was a tangible reminder of his success. In this situa-
          tion, he cultivated a relationship with himself that fed self-esteem and
          mastery.
               The central message of the psychodynamic approach is that we are the
          sum of our significant relationships. None of our relationships is quite so
          central as the one that we have with ourselves. In coaching ourselves, we
          take control over our relationship to our self ; the voice that we use as
          coach will be the voice that enters our head when we tackle the risk and
          uncertainty of markets.
