P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                213


          not really understanding what is going on. It’s a confused state, but also a
          frustrated one, as I don’t feel in control in the situation. I’ve learned that
          if I place myself in environments that are incompatible with chaos, I am
          in a much more balanced frame of mind. Such environments are ordered
          and well organized—my notes and materials are readily at hand—and they
          are designed to evoke positive feelings. Music is particularly effective for
          me in this regard. It is also harder for me to feel chaotic if I have gone
          through a routine of research and track markets prior to the New York
          stock market open. I organize my ideas in advance to help me feel more
          organized, settled, and in control.


              You can structure your trading routines to make them incompati-
              ble with stress and distress.


               When you are your own trading coach, you have wide latitude in modi-
          fying your environment—inner and outer—so that it does not trigger states
          that are associated with poor trading. One trader I worked with loved trad-
          ing in a room with other traders (he joined a prop firm) because, in the
          social setting, he was too embarrassed to engage in behaviors he might
          lapse into on his own. He found that he was much more prudent about
          risk-taking and much less emotionally volatile when he was accountable to
          others. The key is to find a state or situation that is incompatible with
          the triggers for your worst trading and then build that into your normal
          trading routine.
               A simple way to get started is to complete the following sentence:


              I trade my worst when I                                                 .


               Once you write your answer, your assignment is to create the incom-
          patible situation. For example, I would complete the sentence with “don’t
          do my homework.” I know that my day’s preparation for the trade has a
          huge bearing on my odds for success that day. I also know that I’m least
          likely to do my homework diligently if I oversleep or am fatigued. When
          I build stretching and physical exercise into my early mornings, I enter
          an energized state that prepares me for the homework: I’ve learned to as-
          sociate the vigorous, energetic state with being prepared and engaging in
          my preparation. After you observe the differences in your states when you
          trade your best and worst, you’ll be able to construct similar activities that
          proactively keep you in an optimal trading mode.
