P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          322                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          price. Thus our analyses can only use 998 of the data points of the 1,000
          that we downloaded. If you want an even 1,000 data points, you’d have to
          download the last 1,002 values.
              With a bit of practice, all of this will become second nature. It will
          take only a minute or two to open your data files, copy and paste the raw
          data, write your formulas, and copy the cells to complete your sheet. In this
          example, we are exploring how the prior day’s return is related to the next
          day’s return. We’re setting the spreadsheet up to ask the question, “Does
          it make sense to buy after an up day/sell after a down day; does it make
          sense to sell after an up day/buy after a down day; or does it make no ap-
          parent difference?” I call the independent variable the candidate predictor,
          because we don’t really know if it is related to our variable of interest. It’s
          also only a candidate because we’re not conducting the statistical signif-
          icance tests that would tell us more conclusively that this is a significant
          predictor. Rather, we’re using the analysis much as we used the charting in
          the prior lesson: as a way to generate hypotheses.


              Remember, in the current examples, we’re using historical rela-
              tionship to describe patterns in markets, not to statistically analyze
              them. We’re generating, not testing, hypotheses.

               If I had been interested in examining the relationship between the prior
          week’s price change with the next week’s return, the spreadsheet would
          look very similar, except the raw data would consist of weekly index data,
          rather than daily. In general, it’s neatest for analysis if you are investigat-
          ing the impact of the prior period’s data on the next period. This ensures
          that all observations are independent; there are no overlapping data.
               To see what I mean, consider investigating the relationship of the
          prior week’s (five-day) price change on the price change over the next five
          trading days utilizing daily market data. Your independent variable in col-
          umn F would now look like “=((E7-E2)/E2)* 100)”—price change over the
          past five days. The dependent variable in column G would be written as
          “=((E12-E7)/E7)* 100”: the next five-day’s price change. Note, however, that
          as you copy those cells down the spreadsheet per the above procedure, that
          each observation at cells F8, F9, F10, and so on and G8, G9, G10, and so
          on, is not completely independent. The prior five-day return overlaps the
          values for F8, F9, and F10, and the prospective five-day return overlaps for
          cells G8, G9, and G10. This will always be the case when you’re using a
          smaller time period for your raw data than the period that you’re investi-
          gating for your independent and dependent variables.
               Inferential statistical tests depend on each observation in the data set
          being independent, so it is not appropriate to include overlapping data
