P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          216                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                Since the late 1970s, I have traded actively and gained a pretty good feel
          for many short-term market patterns, including patterns of volume and in-
          traday sentiment. Many times I first become aware of these patterns with a
          gut feeling: something seems right or not right about the market action.
          I have learned through hard-won experience that I suffer in my perfor-
          mance if I ignore these intuitions. They are not based on hopes or fears;
          they are the result of implicit learning over a period of years. In my mental
          rehearsals, I include scenarios in which I act upon this feel for the market,
          recalling specific, recent trades in which I saved myself considerable grief
          by not overriding my judgment. This rehearsal of positive associations has
          created a kind of intrinsic reinforcement: I actively look forward to the
          emergence of those gut cues and am mentally prepared to act on them
          when they arise.
                As I mentioned in the previous section, I have many positive associ-
          ations to music. Indeed, as I’m writing this, I’m listening to music from a
          group called Edenbridge, a kind of music that I find both energetic and up-
          lifting. My writing today began at 6:30 A.M., and it is now two hours later
          and I’m going strong. The association of the music with the writing keeps
          me in a positive state of mind. It keeps me looking forward to the writing,
          even when the editing process can become tedious. With these positive
          connections activated regularly, my more negative patterns of procrastina-
          tion are not reinforced and gradually lose their strength. It is not necessary
          for me to fight my tendency to procrastinate; such internal conflict would
          likely create writer’s block. Rather, I create a positive source of motivation
          that outweighs the negative reinforcement value of avoidance.
                A good example of the power of anticipatory reinforcement is occur-
          ring right now as I am writing this. I’m on a 15-hour flight to Hong Kong on
          my way to working with traders in Asia. The cabin is dark, and I’m feeling
          tired. I’ve promised myself, however, that I can take a long-awaited rest af-
          ter I finish this chapter. I find myself more motivated as I get closer to my
          goal; by the time I get to rest, I will have earned it. Ultimately, the positive
          reinforcement of living up to my deal and earning the rest outweighs any
          negative reinforcement value of avoiding the writing out of tiredness.


              Find your strongest motivations and link those to your best behav-
              iors.

               Your coaching assignment for this lesson is to create what-if scenarios
          for the day’s trading, rehearsing the good, planned trades you would make
          in each scenario. These rehearsals should be detailed and vivid, accompa-
          nied by a visualization of the pride and satisfaction you experience when
          you trade well. For every single what-if outcome, you should envision a
