P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          140                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          losing money, guilt, withdrawal from markets, and renewed attempts at ag-
          gressive trading to make up for lost time and opportunity. You’re taking
          the role of psychologist, identifying what is going on instead of identifying
          with it.


              When you describe a pattern of behavior, you’re no longer identi-
              fied with it.

               At this point, we’re not concerned with changing the pattern. Rather,
          we’re becoming more alert to its appearance and more aware of its man-
          ifestations and consequences. This can take days and even weeks of con-
          sistent effort as you sustain the stance of the self-observer. With this ef-
          fort, it’s inevitable that, at times, you’ll interrupt the pattern entirely: you’ll
          avoid the revenge trade or the overaggressive trade. Before you do the right
          things, you’ll stop doing the wrong ones. This builds a sense of mastery and
          self-control: you’re starting to control the patterns instead of having them
          control you.
               Talking aloud and writing in journals, by themselves, will not rid you of
          overlearned behavior patterns, but they do provide you with options. Just
          by doing something different—even in small degree, such as placing much
          smaller revenge trades—you achieve a measure of control.
               One type of talking aloud to gain self-awareness is to actively remind
          yourself that what is going on in the present is not really the problem.
          The problem is what happened and hurt you in the past, not what you are
          reacting (overreacting) to in the present. For instance, you might be losing
          money on a position prior to hitting your stop-out level. You catch yourself
          feeling fear and you’re tempted to bail out of the trade prematurely. In ad-
          dition to talking this fear and temptation aloud, you would remind yourself,
          “The loss on this particular position is not the real issue. I’m reacting to my
          losses from last year (or the loss of my relationship). Abandoning my trade
          idea isn’t going to take away those old losses.”
               (Notice, of course, how this example presumes that you’ve allocated
          a responsible size to your position and a reasonable stop-loss level. If not,
          it could be your poor trading and not any problems from your past that
          would be triggering—quite reasonably!—your fear and desire to exit.)
               What you’re really emphasizing in this talking aloud is the message of,
          “The problem isn’t my trading; it’s something else.” That frees you up to
          deal with the “something else” and not act out the past in the present. It
          also frees you to simply deal with your trade as a trade and not as some-
          thing more emotionally laden. You’ll know that you’ve made significant
          progress when you consistently catch your patterns as they unfold, main-
          taining the role of observer rather than passive participant.
