P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          189


              For this trader, good enough wasn’t good enough. He couldn’t view his
          trade as a success unless it was a home run. For every home run he hit,
          however, he took a harrowing loss, leaving him discouraged and worried
          about his future. His pattern of needing to be “all in” to make his money
          back was taking an emotional as well as financial toll.
              I suggested that we try an experiment. The gist of the experiment was
          that he had to divide his capital into four equal segments. No more than
          one segment, at his normal leverage, could go into any single trade idea.
          Thus, if he thought gold was going up, he could use up to a quarter of his
          normal buying power to buy the gold ETF and/or to buy gold miners. If
          he bought five names among the mining stocks, that quarter of his buying
          power would be divided among the five. To utilize the other quarters of
          his buying power, he needed to have different ideas. For instance, while
          he was long gold, he might have a short position on an individual stock or
          sector because of unfavorable news that had just been released.

              An experiment, properly constructed, can provide a power-
              ful, firsthand disconfirmation of our schemas.

               What this meant, of course, was that our trader wouldn’t be using all
          his buying power all the time, because he wouldn’t always have four truly
          independent (noncorrelated) ideas. When he did deploy a good amount of
          his capital, it would be evenly distributed among setups and ideas. Some
          would be devoted to short-term scalps; other money would be used for
          longer-time-frame ideas. Some would be long; some might be short. This
          process would even out his returns, enabling him to benefit from the fact
          that he tended to have more winning trades than losers. By eliminating the
          large losers through diversification, the trader could actually take less risk
          (experience lower volatility of daily returns) and make more money.
               The trader agreed to the experiment for a week. “What do I have to
          lose?” was his attitude. During the week, however, he actually saw that he
          made more money than he had during any week of the past several months.
          This result convinced him to continue the experiment. “I don’t need to be
          banging my head against the wall,” he explained after a few weeks. He was
          making more money—and he was happier doing it. Had he not actually
          conducted the experiment, however, he wouldn’t have truly known—in his
          own experience—how wrong his thinking had been. Pointing out the de-
          structiveness of a negative thought pattern (and the benefits of a more pos-
          itive one) is one thing; actually seeing it for yourself and experiencing the
          difference is far more powerful.

              The successful self-coach creates powerful and vivid experi-
              ences that undercut old habit patterns.
