P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                         9


          X or that we’ll do less of Y. Instead, frame a goal for today that says: “Here
          is what I’m good at, here’s what I did best yesterday, and here’s how I’m
          going to make use of that strength today.”

              Trading goals should reflect trading strengths.

               In the relationship between you the trader and you the coach, the qual-
          ity of the relationship will play an important role in your development. The
          best relationship is achieved when goals are linked to values and ex-
          press distinctive strengths. Relentlessly identify, repeat, and expand what
          you do best—even (and especially) after the worst of trading days. Only
          through repetition can we turn positive behaviors into habit patterns. When
          you are in the habit of identifying and building strengths, you will then be
          truly visible to you. The magic of that relationship—and the confidence it
          brings—will sustain you through the most challenging times.


                      COACHING CUE

          Review the last week’s entries in your trading journal. Count the number of pos-
          itive, encouraging phrases in your writings and the number of negative, critical
          ones. If the ratio of positive to negative messages is less than one, you know
          you aren’t sustaining a healthy relationship with your inner coach. And if you’re
          not keeping a journal, your coach is silent. What sort of relationship is that?




          LESSON 3: MAKE FRIENDS WITH YOUR
          WEAKNESS

          The notion of change is a challenge and a trap. It challenges us to aspire
          to more than who we are, but it can also trap us in self-division. When we
          entertain the notion of change, we divide ourselves into qualities we like
          and those we don’t. We parcel ourselves into strengths and weaknesses,
          good and bad, acceptable and unacceptable.
               Once we make such a division, it is only natural to embrace the good
          and avoid the bad. We dismiss our shortcomings as mistakes, bad luck, or
          exceptions. That helps us identify with a partial image of ourselves and
          keep our frailties from our conscious awareness. Thus banished from the
          front of our minds, those frailties cannot guide our learning. We do not
          sustain the motivation to grow, because we only contact the parts of our-
          selves that are relatively whole.
              Suppose I manage a position poorly because of frustration and I exceed
               my loss limit on the trade, leaving me in the red for the day. I finish flat
