P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      151


          course, I’m defending against the feeling of being wrong and I’m looking
          desperately for reasons to stay in the trade and undo the loss. This reaction
          generally makes the situation much worse. I’ve learned that if I’m behaving
          frantically in a trade, there’s usually good reason for my feelings and I
          need to listen to them.
               Recall that in psychodynamic theory defenses are coping strategies
          that protect us from the emotional pain of past conflicts. One of the most
          basic defenses is repression: keeping thoughts, feelings, and memories
          out of conscious awareness so that they cannot trouble us. The problem
          with repression, of course, is that a conflict repressed is a conflict that
          remains unresolved. We can’t overcome something if we remain unaware
          of its presence. Many traders use their bodies to repress their minds:
          their physical tension binds them, restricting the physical and emotional
          expression of feelings. I’ve met traders who were quite tight physically
          and yet who had no insight into the degree and nature of their emotional
          stresses. In an odd way, getting tense was their way of coping: they were
          always mobilized for danger, tightly keeping themselves in control. It is
          difficult to stay in touch with the subtle cues of trading hunches—the
          implicit knowledge we derive from years of pattern recognition—when
          our bodies are screaming with tension and even pain.
               In your self-coaching, it takes more than a willingness to inter-
          rupt these defensive patterns to make the most of them. What is also
          needed is the ability to focus on the feelings being defended against. The
          questions you want to ask yourself are: “What feelings am I holding off
          when I’m tensing my muscles?” and “What am I trying to avoid by blaming
          others or by walking away from the screen?” The idea is to hold off on that
          defense—purposely relax the muscles, turn the focus inward, stay in front
          of the screen—and simply experience the feelings that are threatening.
               In psychodynamic work this is known as facing or confronting one’s
          defenses. In counseling, for example, a client might begin talking about
          her painful relationship experiences and then suddenly change the topic
          and begin talking about her children and how they are doing in school.
          I might gently point out the change of topic to the client, explaining that
          it’s perhaps easier for her to talk about her children than about herself.
          She then resumes discussing her relationship, and new information—and
          a flood of feelings—comes forth, followed by memories of her bad relation-
          ship with her father. Breaking through the defenses leads to an emotional
          breakthrough: she becomes aware of suppressed and repressed feelings
          and their depth.
               Psychodynamic therapists are quite familiar with this phenomenon:
          when you get in touch with repressed thoughts, feelings, and im-
          pulses, the result is a fresh emotional awareness of your situation. Your
          perspective changes when your emotional state and awareness change.
