P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                 119


          the trend as rising; in the second situation, it’s a clear downtrend. Had you
          bought the market after the up periods, however, you would have severely
          underperformed the market averages. Had you sold after the down peri-
          ods, you would have lost considerable money. The obvious strategy fails
          precisely because it is so obvious. By the time a trend is readily appar-
          ent; all the momentum and trend followers are aboard. They’re the ones
          scrambling to get out when the tide turns, leaving traders who acted on the
          obvious with losses.
               When we create rules, we put a brake on those normal human ten-
          dencies. A rule might be as simple as “only buy if the market is down over
          X period.” Surprisingly, in the broad stock market, such a simple rule works
          pretty well on average. Another rule might be, “Never enter a trade unless
          you first measure risk (stop-loss level) and reward (profit target) and have
          a reward-to-risk ratio of 2:1 or better.” Such a rule would restrain a trader
          who is tempted to jump aboard late in a market move.
               What traders call setup criteria often are simply rules for getting them
          into trades. When the criteria are not established as firm rules—and men-
          tally rehearsed as such—there is a tendency to violate the setups. This vi-
          olation often occurs because of the fear of missing a profit opportunity or
          because of risk aversion after a prior loss or series of losses. When the
          setups are structured as rules, trading may not be mechanical, but it can be
          much more consistent. Most frequently, the inconsistent trader is the one
          with the loosest rules.


              Rules aid trading consistency.

               When you are your own trading coach, you not only formulate your
          rules, but also must do so in a way as to maximize the odds that you will
          actually follow them. The key to successful rule-creation is the recognition
          that rules are more than thoughts that go into your head. A good rule also
          comes with feelings attached: an awareness of both the consequences of
          violating the rule and the benefits of following it. What keeps a diabetic per-
          son faithful to a diet or an eager child patiently waiting her turn to answer
          a question in class? It’s not just the thought of the rule, but also the imme-
          diate sense of what would happen if the rule were violated. When people
          think, “I can get away with it,” the rule loses its force: it’s merely a set of
          empty words and good intentions.
               This, then, is the secret to formulating trading rules, whether they re-
          late to entries, exit, position sizing, stop-losses, diversification, or idea gen-
          eration: whenever you write down the rule or mentally rehearse it, make
          sure that you are emotionally connected to that rule. Make yourself re-
          live situations in which you’ve violated the rule. Focus your attention on
