P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           275

          The idea is to make right thinking and right action a regular part of your
          experience, so that you become your ideals.


                     COACHING CUE

          Check out Michael’s insights into trading journals at http://tradermike.net/
          2005/08/on trading journals/ and http://tradermike.net/2005/08/thoughts
          on day trading/#moving stops. See also Charles Kirk’s insights in this chapter.




          LESSON 84: MENTOR YOURSELF
          FOR SUCCESS

          Brian Shannon is a trader and an educator of traders. His AlphaTrends
          blog (www.alphatrends.blogspot.com) utilizes video to illustrate trading
          patterns each day, a unique resource for developing traders. He has cap-
          tured many of the principles from these videos in his book Technical Anal-
          ysis Using Multiple Timeframes. Brian’s work is a great illustration of
          what I call contextual thinking: placing observed patterns into larger con-
          texts to gauge their meaning and significance. I find that many short-term
          traders run into problems when they become so focused on the patterns
          over the past few minutes that they miss the larger picture of what the
          market is doing from hour to hour, day to day. By gauging patterns within
          larger contexts, we stand a greater chance of aligning ourselves with longer
          timeframe trends.
               Corey Rosenbloom is a full-time trader who chronicles his work in his
          Afraid to Trade blog (www.afraidtotrade.com). What I like most about
          Corey’s work is that he blends an awareness of trading psychology with
          an understanding of the psychology of markets. His site provides a number
          of trading insights, as well as insights into the minds of traders. I grouped
          Brian and Corey for this lesson because both described the ways in which
          they mentor themselves—guide their own learning processes—as part of
          coaching themselves for success.
               Brian’s response to my query about the three things that have been
          most valuable to his self-coaching reflects his trading as well as his teach-
          ing. Let’s take a look.

              Tuning Out Opinions
              Brian stresses that he doesn’t completely ignore what he hears from
              others, but he’s learned to emphasize his own views from what he’s
              learned over the years. “The edge in trading is so small and quite often
