P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         325


          your bottom row in column G (say cell G1002), type in “=average(g2:g500)”
          (without the quotation marks) and hit Enter. In the cell below that (G1003),
          type in “=average(g501:g999)” and hit Enter. This gives you a general sense
          for whether next day returns have been better or worse following the half
          of the days in the sample that were strongest versus the half of days that
          were weakest. Note that you could analyze the next day returns roughly by
          quartiles simply by entering “=average(g2:g250)”; “=average(g251:g500)”;
          “=average(g501:g750)”; and “=average(g751:g999)”.
               What your data will show is that next day returns tend to be most posi-
          tive following weak days in the S&P 500 Index and most restrained follow-
          ing strong days in the Index. How much of a difference makes a difference
          for your trading? As I emphasized earlier in the chapter, I am not using this
          information to establish a statistically significant mechanical trading sys-
          tem. Rather, I’m looking qualitatively for differences that hit me between
          the eyes. These will be the most promising relationships for developing
          trading hypotheses. If the difference between average next day returns
          following an up day and a down day is the difference between a gain of
          0.01 percent and 0.03 percent, I’m not going to get excited. If the average re-
          turns following the strong days are negative and those following the weak
          days are positive, that’s more interesting.


              As you conduct many sortings, you’ll gain a good feel for differ-
              ences that may form the basis for worthwhile hypotheses.

               So how might I use the information? Perhaps I’ll drill down further,
          examine those quartiles, and find that returns are particularly muted fol-
          lowing strong up days. If that’s the case, I will entertain the hypothesis of
          range-bound trading the morning following a strong daily rise in the S&P
          500 Index. If I see that particularly weak days in the S&P 500 Index tend to
          close higher the next day, I may entertain the notion of an intraday rever-
          sal the day following a large drop. The data provide me with a heads up,
          a hypothesis—not a firm, fixed conclusion.
               The data might also help sharpen some of my trading practices. If I’m
          holding positions for intermediate-term swing positions, I might be more
          likely to add to a long position after a daily market dip than after a strong
          daily rise. I might be more likely to take partial profits on a short position
          following toward the end of a weak market day than toward the end of an
          up day.
               And suppose we find no apparent differences whatsoever? This, too,
          is a finding. It would tell us that—at this time frame, for this time
          period—there is no evidence of trend or countertrend effects. This would
          help us temper our expectations following strong and weak market days.
