P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          134                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               The best way to identify situations in which past conflicts intrude into
          current trading is to consult the feelings evoked by your trading prob-
          lems. If they are similar to feelings you’ve experienced in past career and
          relationship situations, there’s a good chance that they represent the
          leading edge of cyclical maladaptive patterns. For instance, if your frus-
          tration gets you into trouble in your trading and has also gotten you into
          trouble with friends and romantic partners, there’s a clear pattern that tran-
          scends markets. If trading leaves you with the same conflicted, hurt feel-
          ings that you’ve experienced in your past, that’s a sign that the past is re-
          fusing to stay in the past.
               As your own trading coach, you sometimes need to dig beneath the
          surface of problems to discover their origins. This discovery must be
          accomplished by reviewing your personal history and mapping that his-
          tory against recent experience. In other words, you want to look not only
          at your current patterns, but past ones as well. It’s in the overlap that we
          can make greatest use of psychodynamic change methods.
               Your assignment is to take a sheet of paper and draw two sets of
          sine waves, each with at least four peaks and four troughs. For the first
          set of sine waves, you’ll mark the peaks with the “peak experiences”
          from your life: your most positive and fulfilling experiences. These ex-
          periences can be taken from any life sphere, from relationships to ca-
          reer. You’ll label the troughs with the most negative experiences of your
          life, again from any sphere. These experiences will be those filled with
          the most emotional pain and distress. By the time you’re finished, the
          first sine wave chart should be filled with the highlights and lowlights of
          your life.
               When you’re finished with the first set of sine waves, you’ll fill out the
          second set similarly, only you’ll limit your entries to trading-related in-
          cidents. Thus, you’ll mark the peaks of the sine waves with your most pos-
          itive and fulfilling trading experiences and the valleys of the sine waves
          with your most painful and upsetting market-related experiences. Make
          sure that all of your entries from both sets of sine waves are described
          in sufficient detail that you can readily appreciate why each incident was a
          peak or valley experience.
               The real work comes in when you compare the peaks across the two
          sets of waves and the valleys. You’re looking for common themes that link
          your life experience with your trading experience. Many of these com-
          monalities will be at an emotional level. Here are some common ones to
          look out for:

            r Themes of adequacy and inadequacy.
            r Themes of rebellion against rules and discipline.
            r Themes of boredom and risk taking.
