P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                              127

          we accelerate their internalization, freeing our minds for the basic tasks of
          trading.
              A huge advantage of the human brain in this context is the ability
          to generate experience virtually, through the use of imagination. If we
          vividly imagine a specific trading situation and visualize ourselves, step-by-
          step, enacting a new way of handling that situation, the mental rehearsal
          approaches the power of actual experience. You do not have to trade to
          rehearse many trading-related behaviors. By creating realistic situations in
          our minds and using imagination to summon our desired patterns, we can
          also cement these patterns.
              A technique that makes use of this kind of visualization is the stress in-
          oculation approach first described by Donald Meichenbaum. By mentally
          summoning stressful market scenarios and imagining in detail how we
          want to respond to these, we inoculate ourselves against those stresses by
          priming our coping mechanisms. This mental preparation can be applied
          to a range of situations, from ones that are psychologically challenging to
          those that require new trading methods.


              Our coping is mobilized when we imagine anticipated stressful sit-
              uations, preparing us for when those situations actually occur in
              trading.


               The key to making effective use of imagery is ensuring that the im-
          agery is vivid and evokes real feeling. Unlike a simple verbal repetition of a
          trading goal, imagery has the power to evoke the emotions associated with
          situations. This imagery turns the verbal recitation into a much closer ap-
          proximation of trading experience. When we vividly imagine a trade going
          through our mental stop-loss level before we can execute an exit, we sum-
          mon some of the fearful or frustrated feelings normally associated with un-
          expected loss. While we experience a mild version of the trading emotions
          (imagery can rarely fully duplicate actual experience), we can rehearse
          our best practices, keeping ourselves planful and disciplined in the face
          of stress. This mild exposure to the trading stress is like the body’s expo-
          sure to a weak form of a virus: it inoculates because it is strong enough to
          arouse adaptive responses, but not so strong as to pose a major threat.
               Few psychological techniques are as recognized and recommended as
          imagery, and few are executed as poorly. There are several facets of effec-
          tive imagery exercises:

            r Specificity—It’s not good enough to imagine a stressful situation,
              such as losing money or missing an opportunity, in the abstract. The
              imagery should be very specific and guided, visualizing a specific mar-
              ket and market situation, specific price levels, and specific market
