P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008      13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                           143


          consequences have accumulated, it’s all too easy to deny and minimize
          problems, putting them out of mind. When you hit bottom the conse-
          quences have gotten to the point where they cannot be ignored; they have
          inflicted too much pain and damage. At that point, people give up entirely,
          or they reach the point of hating what their habit has done to their lives. “I
          can’t go back there again,” is the feeling of many people who have reached
          that point of hate and disgust. At that point, the old ways are held at arm’s
          length; there is no identification with them.
               A great application of this idea (and worthwhile homework exercise)
          is to focus on one enemy that you want to conquer over the next month of
          trading. Your choice should be a pattern of thinking, feeling, and acting that
          has noticeably hurt your trading in the past several months, and it should
          be a pattern that you’ve observed in others areas of your life. This is espe-
          cially powerful if, with your sine wave charts, you’ve observed damaging
          consequences of the pattern not only in trading but also in those other life
          areas. You can then call to mind all the pain that this pattern has caused
          you over the years and the prices you’ve paid for repeating the pattern.
          You declare that pattern your enemy and then you purposefully look for
          opportunities to confront this enemy in each day’s trading.
               Notice that this is different from simply observing a pattern as it’s hap-
          pening. Instead, you’re actively anticipating the pattern and even looking
          forward to its appearance so that you have the opportunity to reject it. The
          trader’s frame of mind becomes, “I’m not the problem; it’s this old pattern
          that’s the problem.” Once you frame outmoded ways of thinking and acting
          as leftovers from the past that no longer work for you, you’ve taken a giant
          step toward freeing yourself from those patterns.
               It will take sustained effort to tackle your enemy, but it can be tremen-
          dously fun and empowering as well. Each time you notice your old ways of
          losing money and refuse to engage in them, you’ve won a victory against
          your enemy—and struck a blow for your own sense of confidence and

                      COACHING CUE

          One of the ﬁrst enemies to tackle in self-coaching is procrastination. We pro-
          crastinate when we know we need to change, but cannot summon and sustain
          a sense of urgency. In that situation, procrastination itself becomes the pattern
          we must battle, as it robs us of the power to change our lives. Often, procrastina-
          tion is itself a defense—a way of avoiding anxieties associated with anticipated
          changes. By starting with small, nonthreatening changes that we undertake ev-
          ery single day, we do battle with procrastination and build a sense of control
          and mastery over change processes. Big goals and radical changes often meet
          with procrastination. If you focus on intermediate goals that can be pursued
          regularly, you rob change of its threat value.
