P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           293


              One of Ray’s best practices is the separation of his daily journals
          into trading and personal components. In his trading journal, he grades
          his entry and exit discipline, giving himself three points if he entered and
          exited according to plan; one point if either the entry or exit broke disci-
          pline; and zero points if he broke discipline on both. “I look to maintain a 90
          percent threshold,” he explains. “I must garner 90 percent of the total pos-
          sible points. If I drop below 90 percent but above 85 percent, I start looking
          for causes, and I start remedial actions. If I drop below 85 percent, I take
          time off from trading.” In the trading journal, he also tracks the excursion
          of each of his trades, expressing how much he took out of the trade as a
          proportion of what he possibly could have made. “I seek to capture around
          65 percent of a possible move,” he elaborates. “If I find that I am consis-
          tently capturing significantly less than 65 percent, I take this as a warning I
          am entering an ebb state.”


              Like successful manufacturing businesses, traders can engage in
              continuous quality improvement by evaluating their processes and
              correcting shortcomings.

               In the personal portion of the journal, Ray notes event, feelings, and
          behaviors that accompany each of his trades. “The aim here,” he points
          out, “is to have enough details so that I can spot the patterns that warn of
          fundamental shifts, breaches of discipline, and ebb-and-flow conditions.”
          In other words, he is tracking his performance much as he tracks a market,
          looking for signs of trends emerging from the data. When he is flowing, he
          wants to be more aggressive in his trading; when his execution is ebbing,
          he wants to cut his risk. Toward this end, he also tracks his trading metrics,
          including his average win and loss sizes; his win and loss rate; the standard
          deviations of profits and losses; consecutive wins and losses; average hold-
          ing periods for winners and losers; his expectancy ratio; his drawdowns;
          and his recovery periods from drawdowns. The key to Ray’s self-coaching
          is to study himself as intensively as he studies markets.
               John Forman echoes Ray’s point about making sure that one’s trad-
          ing life fits into her personal life. “The first thing a trader needs to do,”
          he emphasizes, “is step back and take a big picture view of things. This
          is extremely important for new traders, as they need to figure out how
          trading is going to fit into their lives. Even folks who have been doing it
          for a while need to do this from time to time as well. Trading is part of
          one’s life, not separate from it. What part it plays must necessarily define
          how it is approached, and that can change over time. Periodically taking
          the 30,000-foot view allows one to maintain perspective.” I wholeheartedly
          agree with John’s insight. Even successful professional traders can become
