P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               199

          have emphasized, the first step in the change process is to become our own
          observers and recognize the patterns that hold us back. Your behaviors, as
          irrational and destructive as they seem, are there for a reason. A careful
          behavioral analysis will reveal the reasons—and will position you well for
          changing those.



          LESSON 62: IDENTIFY
          SUBTLE CONTINGENCIES

          The linkages between situations and our behavioral responses to those
          linkages are sometimes quite clear. When traders experience fear in a
          volatile market and prematurely exit a position, we can readily appreci-
          ate that they are managing their emotions, not their capital. The relief at
          being out of a fast market outweighs objective considerations of risk and
          reward.
               Other times, the contingencies that govern our behavior are far more
          subtle and difficult to identify. For that reason, such patterns can be ex-
          tremely challenging to change. If we don’t know what we’re responding to,
          it’s difficult to shape a different response pattern.
               Subtle shifts of mood are one example of stimulus situations that could
          affect decision-making without our awareness. For instance, some individ-
          uals are emotionally reactive to the amount of sunlight they receive and
          can experience winter blues or even seasonal affective problems during
          periods of low sunlight. This disruption can affect a trader’s concentration
          and motivation, interfering with his research and preparation. Similarly,
          family conflicts can affect mood, which in turn affects trading. One trader
          I worked with found himself less patient with his ideas, entering and exit-
          ing before his signals unfolded. When we looked into the problem, it was
          clearly episodic—not something that occurred every day. During periods
          of conflict at home, he was more irritated, and that manifested itself as
          impatience in his trading.


              The problem patterns in our trading are often triggered by subtle
              shifts in mood and energy level.


               Many physical cues can also affect mood and cognitive functioning.
          These cues include fatigue, hunger, muscle tension, and fitness. I know
          that I process market data much more effectively and efficiently when I am
          alert. Anything that affects my energy level adversely will also impair my
          ability to synthesize large amounts of market information. This is not only
          because I am less cognitively efficient, but because lack of alertness also
