P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               243



              Your trading business is most likely to succeed if you play to your
              strengths and work around your weaknesses.

               What you’ll find by breaking your trading down in this fashion is ar-
          eas of relative strength and weakness in your performance. You will have a
          historical database of the normal trading in each area of your trading busi-
          ness, and you will have a way to see how your current trading compares
          with those norms. Thus, for example, you might make money overall, but
          your event-based trades (those based on fast entries after news items and
          economic reports) perform much better than your trend-following trades.
          This may say something about the market you’re in and how you want to
          be trading that market by focusing more on what’s working than what is
          not. Similarly, you may find that your average numbers of winners versus
          losers is fine overall, but lagging in one particular market. This could lead
          you to fine tune what you’re doing in that market.
               The goal of keeping score is to identify your own patterns and use
          those patterns to your advantage.
               When you are coaching yourself, I encourage you to think of your-
          self as a collection of different trading systems. Each system—each mar-
          ket or strategy that you trade—contributes to the overall performance of
          your portfolio. Your job is to track the results of each system, see when
          each is performing well, and determine when each is underperforming.
          Armed with that information, you can thus allocate your capital most
          effectively to the systems that are working rather than those that are not.
          Diversification can’t work for you if you are not diversified in how you view
          and work on your trading performance. Just as a football coach breaks
          down his team’s performance into segments—running, kicking, defense
          against the run, defense against the pass, throwing—and works on each,
          you want to analyze and refine your team of strategies. Many a drawdown
          can be avoided if you stay on top of each segment of your trading business.

                      COACHING CUE

          When you add to positions or scale out of them, how much value does your
          management of the trade provide? What is the performance speciﬁc to the pieces
          that you add to positions? How much money do you save or leave on the table by
          removing pieces from your positions? If you hedge your positions, how much do
          you gain or save through those strategies? Are you better trading from the long
          or short side? Do you perform better when trades are entered at certain times
          of day or held for particular time frames? If you drill down with metrics you can
          become speciﬁc when you work on various facets of your trading performance.
