P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                   75


          trader who needs the excitement of risk to sustain interest in trading has
          to blow up. This, truly, is addiction, not passion for markets.


              More on trading addictions can be found in Enhancing Trader
              Performance and here: http://traderfeed.blogspot.com/2006/11/
              dr-bretts-heartfelt-plea-when-trading.html


               One of the most effective ways to exit a flow state—or prevent one
          from emerging in the first place—is to focus attention on oneself rather
          than on one’s performing. You can’t be immersed in a sexual encounter
          if you’re worried about your sexual performance. You can’t find the zone
          in an athletic performance if you’re pressuring yourself to set a record.
          The trader who focuses on P/L during the trade is, to that degree, no longer
          market focused. The dynamics of performance anxiety—thinking about the
          performance while you are performing—is a recipe for disaster if your goal
          is to operate within the zone.
               When I wrote my first trading book, I decided to complete the en-
          tire manuscript before I ever had a signed contract from my publisher. I
          certainly wanted to see the text published, but I wasn’t writing it for roy-
          alties or recognition. The book was written for me, to clarify my thoughts
          and contribute to the body of knowledge within the field. When I wrote in
          this fashion I didn’t have to worry about how the readership would react
          to the ideas, whether editors would like my work, etc. I could just focus on
          the writing. It is very, very difficult to need to perform well and to stay ab-
          sorbed in the performance. The surest way I could have ruined my writing
          experience (and my books) would have been to split my attention between
          generating/writing ideas and speculating about how those ideas would be
          received. Once performance becomes an acute need, not just a genuine
          desire, it is nearly impossible to place the outcome of performance in the
          back of your mind and solely focus on performing.
               So it is for the trader. If a trader needs to make money, it is difficult
          to weather market ups and downs and stay focused on the execution of
          trade ideas and plans. If today’s trade is needed to provide tomorrow’s food
          and shelter, there can be no zone: anxiety naturally takes over whenever
          profits are threatened. Similarly, if I become psychologically attached to
          profitability, basing my self-esteem and identity upon my trading results, I
          no longer control my trading experience: market movements are likely to
          control how I feel. The experience of flow requires a basic level of control
          over what we are doing.
               Perhaps a different analogy will illuminate the issue. My wife Margie
          and I recently invested a good amount of money in tax-free bonds, taking
          advantage of a situation in which their yields had skyrocketed above the
