P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          64                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r When I see that volatility over the past 20 days is expanding, I can
               widen my stops, raise my profit targets, adjust my size, and let trades
               breathe a little more. Not infrequently, the higher volatility environ-
               ment will be one in which I can set multiple price targets, taking partial
               profits when the first objective is hit and letting the rest of the position
               ride for the wider, second target.

              Note that what’s happening in the above situations is that I am tak-
          ing control over my trading based on market volatility. Instead of letting
          market movement (or lack of movement) control me, I am actively ad-
          justing my trading to the day’s environment. That taking of control is a
          powerful antidote to trading distress, turning volatility shifts into potential
          opportunity.


               The Excel skills outlined in Chapter 10 will be helpful in your track-
               ing average volume and volatility over past market periods.

               As your own trading coach, you want to monitor your mood over time.
          When you see your mood turn dark and frustrated, you want to examine
          whether there have been changes in the markets that might account for
          your emotional shifts. Many times, these will be changes in the volatility
          of the markets and instruments you’re trading. Establish rules to adapt to
          different volatility environments as a best practice that aids both trading
          and mood.

                      COACHING CUE

          If you know the average trading volume for your stock or futures contract at each
          point of the trading day, you can quickly gauge if days are unfolding as slow,
          low-volatility days or as busy, higher-volatility days. If you know how current
          volumes compare to their average levels you can identify when markets are truly
          breaking out of a range, with large participants jumping aboard the repricing
          of value. If you can identify markets slowing down as that process unfolds, you
          can be prepared and pull your trading back accordingly.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of stress and distress at the home page on the blog for Chapter 2:
