P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          270                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Don’t Panic
              “These are the famous words found on the cover of the Hitchhikers
              Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams,” Chris explains. “They are
              so true in trading. If you panic, your instincts take over, and these in-
              stincts will surely cause the maximum possible damage to your ac-
              count. If the market suddenly starts to drop big time and you are long,
              don’t be frozen; believe what you see and act. Or decide not to act and
              execute your contingency plan. You need to have a plan for every situ-
              ation. Usually you will pay for every lesson the market gives you. How
              much you pay is totally up to you . . . So if I’m suddenly in an unwanted
              position, I look at the chart and see if I like the position or not. If not,
              I’m out. Simple as that. Otherwise I manage the trade. But never ever
              allow panic to take over.”

               Chris’s lessons are the result of hard-won experience. His attitude of
          taking full responsibility for all aspects of trading lies at the heart of self-
          coaching: you are the author of the story of your trading career. Your ac-
          tions will determine the plot and ending of that story. One of Chris’s lessons
          that I like best is the notion of standing up after being beaten down. His suc-
          cess came as a result of resilience: he lost small amounts of money many
          times before he started to trade well and trade larger. Your assignment
          for this lesson is to create a disaster plan for your trading that explains
          how and when you will cut your trading size/risk when you are not trading
          well, but also how you will stand up and persevere with your best trad-
          ing ideas to bring yourself out of drawdown. The best traders are quick to
          pull in their horns when they’re not trading well, but they are not quick
          to give up on their trading. If you develop and follow your disaster plans,
          you take responsibility for your trading and place yourself in control of
          your market participation. As Chris notes, we cannot repeal uncertainty,
          but we can avoid the poor decisions that come from panic and lack of
          preparation.



                      COACHING CUE

          Make sure your trading journal highlights important lessons learned, so that
          it becomes a constructive tool for review months and years later. The value of
          a journal is in its review, not just its initial writing. If you ensure that every
          journal entry has a lesson for the future, you also ensure that today’s learning
          can enrich tomorrow.
