P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                        25

          as a relatively calm, patient person: it has become an integral part of my
          identity.


              For more on how new experiences generate new roles and scripts,
              check out my blog: http://traderfeed.blogspot.com/2006/11/cross-
              cultural-journey.html.


               So here’s your challenge and your assignment: Identify the person you
          would like to be and then throw yourself into a structured social activity—a
          role—that requires you to enact those ideals. If you want to be more disci-
          plined, take on a discipline: martial arts, work with a personal trainer, etc.
          If you want to be more patient and focused, undergo meditation training
          or work with young children that you care about; if you want to become
          more socially confident, immerse yourself in public speaking; if you want
          to trade more aggressively, join a trading room that mirrors the style you
          want to adopt and actively participate in its discussions. Create the roles
          that mirror your desired identity; live scripts of your choosing. If you can
          place yourself in situations where you routinely practice being the person
          you want to be, you’ll rapidly make that person your own. Change begins
          with novel experience, but is sustained through repetition.


                     COACHING CUE

          To be the trader you want to be, consider taking on a student/trainee. When
          someone is observing you and learning from you, you’ll be on your best be-
          havior. With the teaching script, you’ll access behavior patterns that you would
          never enact in isolation. Alternatively, take on a peer mentorship role. The so-
          cial motivation to live up to your best for your trading buddies will enable you
          to access your best behavior patterns.




          LESSON 9: HOW TO BUILD
          YOUR SELF-CONFIDENCE

          Trading is one of the most challenging occupations, because traders rou-
          tinely face working conditions that they cannot control. Psychological
          research suggests that one important basis for self-confidence is self-
          efficacy: the perception that we can control outcomes that are important to
          us. But how can we sustain self-confidence as traders if we cannot control
          whether we make money from day to day?
