P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          82                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          have never played with markets. They haven’t tried to trade different styles,
          different instruments, and different time frames. They don’t know what it is
          like to hold positions for weeks—or for only a few minutes. These traders
          can’t appreciate the difference between trades made from rapid pattern
          recognition and those made from rigorous analysis. They try to imitate
          other traders, or they take the path of least resistance and trade from su-
          perficial chart or indicator patterns. Elite skills can never develop in such
          a learning environment; intentionality is stunted.
                Elite performers never stop playing. Artists sketch; athletes play in
          scrimmages; actors improvise. Play is a means of self-discovery, and some-
          times we discover passions and talents we didn’t know we had. Your as-
          signment for this lesson is to pick a market, trading style, or time frame
          different from your usual one and conduct paper trading in parallel to your
          usual trading. Your paper trading should document real trade ideas and
          real-time tracking of P/L. The simulated trades should be managed as real
          ones, with profit targets, stop-losses, and decisions about adding to or re-
          ducing positions.
                For example, I maintain a separate, small trading account where I play
          with longer-term trading ideas. It’s a way to test out my research and dis-
          cover possible edges with very small amounts of money at risk. A major-
          ity of ideas in this sketchbook account may fail to bear fruit, but it only
          takes one promising effort to open new doors to opportunity. This keeps
          my mind and trading fresh; it also helps me stay in touch with the market’s
          larger picture when placing bread-and-butter shorter-term trades. Most of
          all, it tells me which trading ideas and strategies truly capture my interest
          and imagination: which may form the promising basis of a new niche. When
          you play with trading, you avoid stagnation; you also discover niches that
          will sustain intentionality and performance. That’s how you build a trading
          career—and that’s how you build the mental muscles that propel perfor-
          mance to ever-higher levels.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you structure your trading preparation like you would structure physical work-
          out routines, then every day you are adding a bit to your capacity to sustain
          intention. I recently observed a trader enter a trade with a strong idea. He was
          stopped out, but reentered the same trade on a fresh signal. That was stopped
          out also. He entered a third time and then rode a trend for a very large winner.
          His resilience was a function of his persistence: his ability to sustain purpose
          over time, even through fatigue and discouragement. His diligent preparation
          each day conditioned him to make extra eﬀorts when it counted, at a time when
          most others would have given up on the idea. When you put eﬀort into trading
          development, you not only prepare the mind, you condition the will.
