P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                215

                When we reinforce positive patterns, we not only strengthen these but
          also begin the process of extinguishing negative patterns. In behavioral the-
          ory, a stimulus-response connection is extinguished over time if it is not re-
          inforced. The animal that was given food each time it performed a trick will
          eventually stop performing the trick if food is not forthcoming. Behavioral
          patterns, in this way, not only have to be learned but also actively rein-
          forced to find active expression in our trading. We can unlearn negative
          behavior patterns simply by withdrawing their reinforcement and by intro-
          ducing more powerful rewards elsewhere. This is a powerful principle.
                One common learned pattern among traders is the connection between
          anger/frustration and aggression. When traders become frustrated by mar-
          ket conditions—say, a choppy, directionless trade—they react out of anger
          and lash out by placing trades to get even with the offending market. This
          pattern—relieving anger by lashing out—may make traders feel better for
          the moment (negative reinforcement), but it leads to poor decisions and
          losing trades.
                How can we use positive associations to unlearn this pattern of re-
          venge trading?
                Suppose a trader engages in a thorough examination of his trading dur-
          ing the choppy markets of the past month. He investigates charts to iden-
          tify the choppy periods and then reviews all his trades from these periods,
          pulling out the most successful ones. What he may find is that his success-
          ful trades in choppy conditions are more selective (fewer in number); that
          they are placed near the edges of trading ranges; and that they are held for
          shorter periods of time to capitalize either on breakouts/false breakouts or
          on moves back within the range. His losing trades, on the other hand, tend
          to be placed in the middle of the range and are held for longer periods,
          reversing before they can hit distant price targets.
                Armed with this bit of self-coaching information, the trader now can
          view the choppy period as one of opportunity, not threat. When he notices
          a trading range going into the day’s trade, he can use imagery to rehearse
          calm caution when the market is trading near the center of the range.
          He can also mentally rehearse entries near range extremes, including his
          placement of modest price targets. When he rehearses these trade ideas,
          it is with the feelings associated with his prior winning trades. Over time,
          with repetition, he learns a positive association with range-bound, choppy
          markets. His prior behavior pattern, built on frustration and its removal,
          is no longer reinforced. It faces gradual extinction, as he builds the more
          constructive associative patterns.

              Find the market conditions that are most challenging for you and
              then identify how you trade them best. This process turns threat
              into opportunity.
