P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          156                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 49: THE POWER
          OF DISCREPANCY

          A cornerstone of the psychodynamic framework is that talk alone does not
          generate lasting change. Rather, as we saw in the last lesson, we change
          through new, powerful emotional experiences. These experiences are pow-
          erful precisely because they undercut our worst fears and expectations and
          show us that we can, indeed, master the past conflicts and feelings that
          were once overwhelming.
               We can think of this change process as generating new endings to
          old stories. Perhaps my old story is that I am fearful of loss, having been
          through traumatizing losses in my past, either as a trader or predating my
          trading career. Out of this fear of loss, I find it impossible to hold trades
          until their logical stop-loss or profit targets have been hit. Invariably I
          become so concerned with protecting a gain or minimizing a loss that I
          front-run my trading plan and exit early.
               Note that this pattern is a defensive one: I am trying to ward off the dis-
          comfort of loss by getting out of the market prematurely. The cost of that
          pattern is that I never fully participate in the upside of my ideas, leaving
          me to chop around in my P/L. As long as I continue to act on that pattern,
          I never stay in touch with that fear of loss and thus can never master that
          fear. Repeating the pattern simply reinforces it.
               So what we need in psychodynamic work is a new ending to the
          scenario. We need to refuse to indulge in the defense and purposefully sit
          in the trade, while allowing the feeling of fear to remain. The idea is that, at
          one point of time in our lives, this fear was too threatening to sit with. Now,
          however, at a new life period when you have more resources, you can
          handle the fear. You don’t need to continue to defend against it. Getting in
          touch with your basic conflict and its emotions—the things you have been
          most defending against—is crucial to the psychodynamic change process.
               The psychodynamic change process can be schematized as a sequence:

            r Identify your recurring problem patterns.
            r Connect yourself to the costs and consequences of those patterns.
            r Identify what those patterns are defending against (what you are
              avoiding).
            r Create experiences, particularly in relationships, for facing what
              you’ve been avoiding.
            r Repeat these experiences across different relationships to internalize
              new, constructive ways of coping.

             Your problems, this view emphasizes, are simply ways of protecting
          you from fearful memories, feelings, or desires. Once you experience
