P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          136                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Sometimes, though, there truly aren’t links between our trading prob-
          lems and our prior life’s challenges. The trading problems may simply re-
          flect shifting markets, a lack of skills and experience, or situational factors
          related to present-day distractions. If these are the most important sources
          of current trading difficulties, the psychodynamic approach will be less rel-
          evant to your change efforts. Rather, you may need to structure your learn-
          ing process, as described in the Enhancing Trader Performance book, or
          you might need to adopt a framework that is more present-centered, such
          as the self-coaching approaches described in chapters 6 and 7.


              Not all trading problems have an emotional genesis. Sometimes we
              just need to hone our trading skills.

               In my experience, the most fertile area to seek for similarities between
          trading problems and prior life conflicts is in significant relationships: those
          with parents and romantic partners. Conflicts with parents and lovers
          are usually among the most emotionally powerful, and are the ones we
          are most likely to defend against—and thus reenact—in our trading.
          Once we crystallize those patterns, we can become quite adept at recogniz-
          ing their reappearance. That is the first step toward short-circuiting them
          and providing them with a new ending.
               One trader I worked with had numerous relationships with girlfriends
          over the years, but he never committed to any of them. Indeed, he often
          kept one relationship on the side in case his primary one ever fell through.
          He had lost a sibling when he was young; his parents, devastated by the
          loss, tried to forge on by not dwelling on the tragedy. Our trader learned to
          defend against loss by never getting too involved with another person. This
          defense kept him from reexperiencing the pain of the childhood event, but
          it also kept him from having a fulfilling emotional life.
               So what do you think his trading problem was? Although he described
          himself as being passionately interested in trading, he in fact spent surpris-
          ingly little time at it. He undertraded markets—in other words ignored trad-
          ing signals, traded with almost ludicrously small size—and he was easily
          distracted by communications in chat rooms and reading web sites. While
          he justified the latter as “preparation” for his trading, he never actually got
          around to trading seriously. Just as he avoided commitment and loss in
          relationships, he dabbled at the edges of markets, never achieving anything
          close to his potential.
               To crystallize this pattern, a good place to begin is with our under-
          lying need. The trader in the example above has an overwhelming need
          for safety and consequently takes the path in relationships and trading that
          seems safest. The feeling that he is guarding against is the pain of loss: the
          vulnerability of investing oneself and losing that emotional investment. The
