P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009      22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          70                                                        THE DAILY TRADING COACH



            Check the Adjective That Best Corresponds to How You’re Feeling Now
               r Happy, Neutral, Unhappy
               r Satisfied, Neutral, Dissatisfied
               r Energetic, Neutral, Run Down
               r Optimistic, Neutral, Pessimistic
               r Focused, Neutral, Scattered
               r Calm, Neutral, Stressed Out
               r Competent, Neutral, Incompetent
               r Growing, Neutral, Stagnant
           Scoring: For each of the first adjectives in the series that you check, give your-
           self a +1 score. For each “neutral” answer, count this as 0. For each of the third
           adjectives that you check, give yourself a −1 score. Add the total. If your total
           score is +4 or higher, you want to identify what you’re doing right to keep your
           mood positive—and maybe even do more of it. If your score is −4 or lower, you
           want to identify what you might be doing wrong to keep your mood negative. If
           your score is relatively neutral, you want to take both of these steps, identifying
           what you’re doing that gives you more positive experience and what you’re do-
           ing that takes away from positive experience. By tailoring your daily activities,
           you can tip the balance between positive and negative emotions in a favorable
           direction.

          FIGURE 3.1 Brief Emotional Checklist

               It is not necessary that you feel great after every single trading day.
          That is unrealistic. Rather, what’s important is the balance, over time, of
          positive and negative emotional experience. If you’re feeling badly at the
          end of trading days more often than you’re feeling good, that’s a clear
          indication that either you’re not trading well—that markets have shifted
          in ways that you have not adapted to— and/or that you’re not doing a suf-
          ficiently good job of advancing your learning curve with clear, achievable
          goals.
               When you take your emotional temperature at the end of each trading
          day, you also can become a better observer of the specific trading behav-
          iors that aid and damage your mood. I learned to limit my losses on trades
          when I realized fully—in my own experience—that outsized losses were
          not only reducing my annual returns, but also ruining my love for and in-
          terest in trading. I also learned to focus on trading strengths when I real-
          ized that these brought me a deep sense of accomplishment over time. The
          idea of trading without emotion is hogwash: as long as we care about our
          performance, our feelings will be engaged when we put our capital at risk
          and pursue our goals. That emotional engagement can work to our favor if,
          through our self-coaching, we sustain a positive emotional state, bringing
          out the best in us.
