P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               107


          from having—and sustaining—the motivation to alter that pattern. It is
          in the motivational arena that many of our change efforts, personal and
          professional, fall short. We need only to look at the dismal record of peo-
          ple’s attempts to diet, eat in healthy ways, or exercise regularly to see that
          knowing what you need to do and actually doing it are two different things.
               When you are your own trading coach, your challenge is to moti-
          vate change, just as a sports coach motivates a team to keep them work-
          ing hard and sustaining practice efforts. If keeping a journal and track-
          ing your patterns of good and bad trading is nothing more than a routine
          exercise—another item on a to-do list—it will not inspire motivation, and
          you will not sustain the efforts. Stoking the desire to make changes is dif-
          ficult, especially when trading is going reasonably well. “If it ain’t broke,
          don’t fix it,” is a formula for eventually lacking fixes when things do break.
               But there’s a more important reason for sustaining self-coaching ef-
          forts. When you’re trading well is precisely the time you want to be the
          most self-aware of your strengths, so that you can maximize your earn-
          ings at those times. The true competitors and most successful participants
          in sport, warfare, and games of skill such as chess are the ones who pos-
          sess the killer instinct: they have a sense for when they have the advantage,
          and they press that advantage to the hilt. Making modest money when you
          are trading well is a great way to ensure poor returns when you’re not see-
          ing markets as well. For many traders, it’s the relatively few, large gains
          from the best trading periods that contribute most to overall profitability.

              The measure of self-coaching is how hard you work on trading
              when you’re making money.

               It’s as important to work on yourself when you’re trading well as when
          you’re trading poorly. It’s not that you want to fix what isn’t broken; rather,
          you want to crystallize what you’re doing right so that you can do more of it
          and capitalize fully on it. Conversely, when you’re trading poorly, you don’t
          want to lapse into discouragement and defeat. Maintain the journal and the
          pattern recognition efforts to keep you in a constructive mode, even when
          all you may be able to do for the moment is to cut your risk when your
          negative patterns surface. That is still progress.
               So how do excellent traders (and competitors in any field) sustain the
          motivation to operate at elite levels of performance? An important driver
          of that motivation is an intense competitive drive and a ferocious desire
          to win. The traders I’ve worked with personally who have been consis-
          tent, high earners have traded quite differently and viewed markets in rad-
          ically different ways. Some traders have been loud and outgoing; others
          have been cerebral. Some have been uncannily intuitive; others have been
          analytically insightful. The common feature among all of them, however,
          has been their intense competitive nature. They compete against peers,
