P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          183

          As noted earlier, these thoughts will generally form the self-talk that ac-
          companies your most emotional trading episodes. The clearer you are in
          your capturing this self-talk, the more realistic and vivid your imagery work
          will be.
               Let’s take a specific example. A trader I recently worked with uncov-
          ered a pattern that was greatly holding him back in his success. He was a
          profitable trader over many years, but always had the nagging feeling that
          he was not fulfilling his potential. When we examined his trading and think-
          ing patterns, it became clear that he became more risk-averse as he hit new
          peaks in his trading account and new P/L highs for the day. He was upset to
          finish off his highs (for the day, for the week), so he became unusually risk-
          averse as he hit these highs. He cut his size, traded less often, and behaved
          like a person who had just undergone a drastic drawdown.
               His self-talk at these times was revealing. “You’ve had a good day,” he’d
          tell himself. “Let’s hang onto the gains. There will be more opportunity
          tomorrow.” When it became clear that he missed opportunity because of
          this unusual caution, he felt vaguely guilty, but he reassured himself that
          his equity curve was positive and “you never go broke taking a profit.”
               This was a difficult pattern to break because, while the trader realized
          the pattern’s limitations, he also bought into it at an emotional level. The
          trader who beats himself up truly suffers as a result of his self-talk and
          will want to change that, simply to feel better. The risk-averse thinking,
          however, kept our trader feeling safe. He liked the consequences of over-
          caution: it helped keep his emotions in check.


              We are less likely to change a pattern if we buy into it, if we’re not
              in at least a moderate amount of distress over the consequences of
              that pattern.

               A key step in changing his self-talk was to reframe the “let’s not lose
          money” talk as “I don’t think I can make money” talk. The trader thought
          of his self-talk as messages of safety; I reframed them as messages of low
          self-confidence. He doesn’t want to finish off his highs, because at some
          level he’s not sure that he can get past those peaks. He doubts his ability
          to bounce back from drawdowns, so he desperately tries to avoid drawing
          down. He settles for a steady, but modest equity curve because he doesn’t
          have confidence that he can generate and sustain more robust returns. Per-
          haps he even feels, deep down, that he does not deserve large rewards.
               Note how, in this situation, my reframing was not a way of helping a
          trader view a negative pattern more constructively; rather, I was framing
          the pattern in a way to accentuate the trader’s discomfort. It’s back to that
          notion that coaching is all about comforting the afflicted and afflicting the
          comfortable. Our trader was far too comfortable in his risk-averse ways;
