P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          54                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          discomfort with an idea because it isn’t so good. Many times, fear is simply
          fear of the unknown, the byproduct of making changes. As Mike Bellafiore
          notes in Chapter 9, that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t take the trade.
               I have been trading for long enough that my checklist is well estab-
          lished in my mind. There was a time, however, when I needed to have it
          written out and in front of me. Is volume expanding in the direction of my
          trade? Is more volume being transacted at the market bid or at the offer?
          Is a growing number of stocks trading at their bid or at their offer? Even
          a very short-term trader can review such criteria quickly, just as a fighter
          pilot would check his gauges and radar screen in a dangerous combat sit-
          uation. A fear response cues you to check your own gauges, to make sure
          you’re making decisions for the right reason.

               You can use your fear as a cue to examine your trade more deeply
               and adjust your confidence in the idea, up or down.

                If you can use fear in this way, even negative emotions can become
          trading tools and even friends. Your homework assignment is to construct
          a quick checklist that you can talk aloud or check off during a trade (or
          prior to placing a trade) when you are feeling particularly uncertain. This
          checklist should prod you to review why you’re in the trade and whether it
          still makes sense to be in it. In this way, you coach yourself to make your
          best decisions even when you’re at your most nervous. Confidence doesn’t
          come from an absence of fear; it comes from knowing you can perform
          your best in the face of stress and uncertainty.

                     COACHING CUE

          Find a positive change in your trading that makes you nervous and then pursue
          it as a trading goal. As I describe in The Psychology of Trading, anxiety often
          points the way to our greatest growth, because we feel anxiety when we de-
          part from the known and familiar. Trading a new market or setup, raising your
          trading size, holding your trades until they reach a target—these are nerve-
          wracking situations that can represent great areas of growth and development.
          In that sense, fear can become a marker for opportunity.



          LESSON 18: PERFORMANCE ANXIETY:
          THE MOST COMMON TRADING PROBLEM

          Imagine you’re about to give a presentation to a group of people as part of
          a job interview process. You very much want the job, and you’ve prepared
