P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           297

          to. He would have to spend hundreds of hours working on his grip, motion,
          and control. It takes 15 to 30 minutes of deep breathing a day to develop
          and maintain this skill. My partner and co-founder of SMB Capital, Steve
          Spencer, taught me how to properly breathe. Steve teaches this to our new
          traders on our prop desk. I used to think I accurately processed the data
          that the market offered. But after I learned how to properly breathe, I rec-
          ognized that this was not accurate . . . You must develop the skill of quieting
          your mind so that you accurately process your market data and, as a result,
          fulfill your trading potential.”
               Mike tells the story of a young trader next to him who cheered when-
          ever his stocks moved in his favor. The veteran traders merely smirked;
          that trader soon blew up. “For old-school traders like us,” he points out,
          “there is no celebrating intraday. You are now rooting for your stocks and
          not just interpreting the data that the market is offering.” By controlling his
          breathing, he is better able to let the market data come to him, improving
          his decision-making.


              If you’re celebrating or bemoaning a trade while you’re in it, you’re
              not focused on the market itself.

               Mike Bellafiore’s third self-coaching best practice is watching his trad-
          ing tapes. “Watching my trading tapes has improved my trading more than
          any other self-improvement technique,” he asserts. “Many great athletes
          such as Alex Rodriguez use video to improve their performance. I record
          all my trades and watch back the important plays. Doing so has helped me
          particularly with my two biggest weaknesses: closing out a winning posi-
          tion prematurely, and adding size.” By watching tapes of his trading, Mike
          developed rules for recognizing when he should hold positions, when he
          should get back into a position he has exited, and when he should get out
          of positions. These rules were compiled into lists that became his system.
          “It gave me the confidence to add size when I see a great risk/reward op-
          portunity that is on my list,” he explains. “I learned from my trading tapes
          that adding size in certain spots offered favorable risk/reward trading op-
          portunities, and that perhaps it was even irresponsible to not add size with
          certain trades. So when I spot a trade from my list of When to Add Size, I
          just execute.”
               Once again, self-coaching boils down to directed, hard work. “In my
          trading space,” Mike insists, “if you are not willing to come into the office
          on the weekends and/or find some time after the close to watch your trad-
          ing tapes, then you are not competing as a trader. Trading is a sport. It’s
          a competition. And the results of your trading are often determined by the
          effort you put in before the open.”
