P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          78                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          simple reasoning—chart patterns or price levels—that may well lack any
          true risk/reward edge. Worse still, when we’re run down, we become emo-
          tionally reactive and find ourselves chasing price highs or lows or roboti-
          cally enacting rules (fade weak stocks in a strong market) without taking
          the time and effort to assess the broader context our decisions (an trending
          day to the upside).
               Managing your energy during the trading day may take little more than
          ensuring that you:
            r Get proper sleep and proper quality of sleep. Interrupted sleep
              can deprive you of important stages of sleep and leave you feeling un-
              rested, even though you’ve spent a full number of hours in bed.
            r Eat properly. Highs and lows in blood sugar can make it difficult to
              sustain concentration; an excess of caffeine and sugar may provide
              temporary jolts, but can also lead to distracting rebound effects.
            r Maintain your mind properly. I’ve seen alcohol and drugs take a
              fearsome toll on traders over time, as partying the night before leads
              to diminished performance the next day. Conversely, those who are
              focused and intentional in their personal lives tend to see this carry
              over into their trading.
            r Maintain your body properly. Physical exercise is one of the
              most neglected facets of a trading plan. Hours upon hours sitting in
              front of a screen do not promote aerobic fitness. Over time, we lose
              conditioning—and our energy batteries lose their charge.
            r Take the breaks. Not many people can stare at a screen and fol-
              low market action continuously through the day without losing focus.
              Breaks during slower market action can replenish the energy and con-
              centration needed when markets become busier.


               A trading career is a marathon, not a sprint: the winners pace
               themselves.

               None of the above considerations is earth shattering, but it’s amazing
          how poorly many traders score if they incorporate the five factors above
          into a daily checklist. We prepare our trades, but we often fail to prepare
          ourselves for trading. How can we stick to disciplined trading decisions if
          we’re inconsistent in our personal discipline?
               When you are your own trading coach, you cannot afford to run your-
          self into the ground by working so hard that you can no longer work. Nor
          can you so neglect your physical state to such a degree that, like that lap-
          top battery, your memory effects lead you to lower and lower energy states
          with each recharging. Your assignment is to track your daily profits and
          losses simply as a function of two factors: your energy level (high or low)
