P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                      77


                      COACHING CUE

          Take short breaks from the trading screen. These breaks can be a great way
          to renew concentration and step back from diﬃcult markets. Some of the best
          breaks are ones that are wholly absorbing, that get you into a diﬀerent zone
          than trading. Physical exercise is one example, talking with people you enjoy
          can be another. I ﬁnd myself wholly absorbed when I play with my cat Gina or
          when I swim in our pool. The activity completely takes my mind away from what I
          had been doing and lets me return with a new perspective. Switch gears—absorb
          yourself physically and/or emotionally—after you’ve been cognitively immersed
          in markets. These breaks can provide some of the most eﬀective trades.




          LESSON 24: TRADE WITH ENERGY

          One of the important dimensions of psychological well-being is energy.
          Happiness, enthusiasm, motivation, and general contentment are difficult
          to sustain when you feel mentally and physically run down. Fatigue is the
          enemy of concentration; physical vibrancy fuels a positive, energetic mood.
               We are like laptop computers running on batteries: after sustained
          operation, we run down. Concentration and attention require effort; even-
          tually we drain our mental reserves and lose focus. This leads to trading
          mistakes: missing opportunities, overlooking important pieces of data, for-
          getting key aspects of trading plans. When we are run down, we’re also
          most likely to fall back into old—and often negative—habit patterns. When
          we’re drained, we might find ourselves eating out of boredom, becoming
          unusually irritated when things don’t go our way, or getting caught up in
          negative ways of thinking.
               Think of it this way: it requires sustained focus to remain goal-oriented.
          To actively direct ourselves, we need an alert, active mind. When we be-
          come fatigued, we lose this active direction. We become passive, respond-
          ing to events rather than making them happen.
               This distinction between active and passive trading is all-important.
          The active trader is one who researches markets, identifies distinct areas
          of opportunity, and consciously executes and manages trades to maximize
          that opportunity. For the active trader, nothing is left to chance: where to
          pursue opportunity, where to sit back, where to take profits, where to limit
          losses—all are preplanned. This takes time, energy, and a sustained focus.
          Good trading, in this sense, is pure intentionality: it is a directed act of will.
               When we are physically drained, we lose the ability to sustain this
          intentional focus. We neglect our research; we fail to calibrate risk and
          reward. We fall back on simple heuristics and enter trades based on
