
P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009        15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                                               vi

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009       15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                  The Daily
                Trading Coach




                                               i

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009        15:45   Printer: Yet to come




          Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publish-
          ing company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
          Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and market-
          ing print and electronic products and services for our customers’ profes-
          sional and personal knowledge and understanding.
              The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
          the market’s ever changing temperament and have prospered—some by
          reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
          trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
          the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
              For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.




                                                 ii

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009         15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                  The Daily
                Trading Coach
                      101 Lessons for Becoming Your
                        Own Trading Psychologist




                      BRETT N. STEENBARGER




                                 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.




                                               iii

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger             January 9, 2009        15:45   Printer: Yet to come




          Copyright 
                    C 2009 by Brett N. Steenbarger. All rights reserved.


          Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
          Published simultaneously in Canada.

          No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
          any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
          otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
          Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
          payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
          Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
          www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
          Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
          748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

          Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
          efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
          accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
          warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
          or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
          contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
          professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
          profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
          consequential, or other damages.

          For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
          contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
          United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.

          Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
          print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
          visit our web site at www.wiley.com.

          Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

          Steenbarger, Brett N.
             The daily trading coach : 101 lessons for becoming your own trading psychologist /
          Brett N. Steenbarger.
                   p. cm. – (Wiley trading series)
             Includes index.
             ISBN 978-0-470-39856-2 (cloth)
            1. Stocks–Psychological aspects. 2. Speculation–Psychological aspects.
          3. Investments–Psychological aspects. 4. Self-help techniques. 5. Personal coaching.
          I. Title. II. Title: Becoming your own trading psychologist.
             HG6041.S757 2009
             332.6 4019–dc22
                                                                                     2008041524

          Printed in the United States of America.

          10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1




                                                         iv

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009       15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                         What? A great man? I always see merely
                             the play-actor of his own ideal.
                                                      —Friedrich Nietzsche




                                               v

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009        15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                                               vi

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                                  Contents


          Preface                                                              xiii

          Acknowledgments                                                      xvii

          Introduction                                                           1


         CHAPTER 1           Change: The Process and
                             the Practice                                        3

         Lesson 1: Draw on Emotion to Become a Change Agent                      4
         Lesson 2: Psychological Visibility and Your Relationship
            with Your Trading Coach                                              7
         Lesson 3: Make Friends with Your Weakness                               9
         Lesson 4: Change Your Environment, Change Yourself                     11
         Lesson 5: Transform Emotion by Trace-Formation                         14
         Lesson 6: Find the Right Mirrors                                       17
         Lesson 7: Change Our Focus                                             20
         Lesson 8: Create Scripts for Life Change                               23
         Lesson 9: How to Build Your Self-Conﬁdence                             25
         Lesson 10: Five Best Practices for Eﬀecting and
            Sustaining Change                                                   29
         Resources                                                              32

         CHAPTER 2           Stress and Distress: Creative
                             Coping for Traders                                33

         Lesson 11: Understanding Stress                                        33
         Lesson 12: Antidotes for Toxic Trading Assumptions                     37



                                                                                vii

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   15:45   Printer: Yet to come




          viii                                                                 CONTENTS



          Lesson 13: What Causes the Distress That Interferes
             with Trading Decisions?                                                40
          Lesson 14: Keep a Psychological Journal                                   43
          Lesson 15: Pressing: When You Try Too Hard to
             Make Money                                                             45
          Lesson 16: When You’re Ready to Hang It Up                                48
          Lesson 17: What to Do When Fear Takes Over                                51
          Lesson 18: Performance Anxiety: The Most Common
             Trading Problem                                                        54
          Lesson 19: Square Pegs and Round Holes                                    58
          Lesson 20: Volatility of Markets and Volatility of
             Mood                                                                   61
          Resources                                                                 64

          CHAPTER 3          Psychological Well-Being:
                             Enhancing Trading Experience                           67

          Lesson 21: The Importance of Feeling Good                                 67
          Lesson 22: Build Your Happiness                                           71
          Lesson 23: Get into the Zone                                              73
          Lesson 24: Trade with Energy                                              77
          Lesson 25: Intention and Greatness: Exercise the Brain
             through Play                                                           79
          Lesson 26: Cultivate the Quiet Mind                                       83
          Lesson 27: Build Emotional Resilience                                     86
          Lesson 28: Integrity and Doing the Right Thing                            89
          Lesson 29: Maximize Conﬁdence and Stay with
             Your Trades                                                            91
          Lesson 30: Coping—Turn Stress into Well-Being                             95
          Resources                                                                 97

          CHAPTER 4          Steps toward Self-Improvement:
                             The Coaching Process                                   99

          Lesson 31: Self-Monitor by Keeping a Trading Journal                      99
          Lesson 32: Recognize Your Patterns                                       103
          Lesson 33: Establish Costs and Beneﬁts to Patterns                       106
          Lesson 34: Set Eﬀective Goals                                            109

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   15:45   Printer: Yet to come




         Contents                                                               ix


         Lesson 35: Build on Your Best: Maintain a Solution Focus              111
         Lesson 36: Disrupt Old Problem Patterns                               114
         Lesson 37: Build Your Consistency by Becoming
            Rule-Governed                                                      118
         Lesson 38: Relapse and Repetition                                     121
         Lesson 39: Create a Safe Environment for Change                       123
         Lesson 40: Use Imagery to Advance the Change
            Process                                                            126
         Resources                                                             130

         CHAPTER 5           Breaking Old Patterns:
                             Psychodynamic Frameworks
                             for Self-Coaching                                 131

         Lesson 41: Psychodynamics: Escape the Gravity
            of Past Relationships                                              132
         Lesson 42: Crystallize Our Repetitive Patterns                        135
         Lesson 43: Challenge Our Defenses                                     138
         Lesson 44: Once Again, with Feeling: Get Distance
            from Your Problem Patterns                                         141
         Lesson 45: Make the Most Out of Your
            Coaching Relationship                                              144
         Lesson 46: Find Positive Trading Relationships                        147
         Lesson 47: Tolerate Discomfort                                        150
         Lesson 48: Master Transference                                        153
         Lesson 49: The Power of Discrepancy                                   156
         Lesson 50: Working Through                                            158
         Resources                                                             161

         CHAPTER 6           Remapping the Mind: Cognitive
                             Approaches to Self-Coaching                       163

         Lesson 51: Schemas of the Mind                                        164
         Lesson 52: Use Feeling to Understand Your Thinking                    167
         Lesson 53: Learn from Your Worst Trades                               170
         Lesson 54: Use a Journal to Restructure Our Thinking                  172
         Lesson 55: Disrupt Negative Thought Patterns                          176
         Lesson 56: Reframe Negative Thought Patterns                          179

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   15:45   Printer: Yet to come




          x                                                                    CONTENTS



          Lesson 57: Use Intensive Guided Imagery to Change
              Thought Patterns                                                     182
          Lesson 58: Challenge Negative Thought Patterns
              with the Cognitive Journal                                           185
          Lesson 59: Conduct Cognitive Experiments to
              Create Change                                                        188
          Lesson 60: Build Positive Thinking                                       190
          Resources                                                                193


          CHAPTER 7          Learning New Action Patterns:
                             Behavioral Approaches to
                             Self-Coaching                                        195

          Lesson 61: Understand Your Contingencies                                 196
          Lesson 62: Identify Subtle Contingencies                                 199
          Lesson 63: Harness the Power of Social Learning                          201
          Lesson 64: Shape Your Trading Behaviors                                  204
          Lesson 65: The Conditioning of Markets                                   207
          Lesson 66: The Power of Incompatibility                                  211
          Lesson 67: Build on Positive Associations                                214
          Lesson 68: Exposure: A Powerful and Flexible
              Behavioral Method                                                    217
          Lesson 69: Extend Exposure Work to Build Skills                          220
          Lesson 70: A Behavioral Framework for Dealing
              with Worry                                                           223
          Resources                                                                226


          CHAPTER 8          Coaching Your Trading
                             Business                                             227

          Lesson 71: The Importance of Startup Capital                             227
          Lesson 72: Plan Your Trading Business                                    231
          Lesson 73: Diversify Your Trading Business                               233
          Lesson 74: Track Your Trading Results                                    236
          Lesson 75: Advanced Scorekeeping for Your
              Trading Business                                                     240

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   15:45   Printer: Yet to come




         Contents                                                               xi


         Lesson 76: Track the Correlations of Your Returns                     244
         Lesson 77: Calibrate Your Risk and Reward                             248
         Lesson 78: The Importance of Execution in Trading                     250
         Lesson 79: Think in Themes—Generating Good
            Trading Ideas                                                      254
         Lesson 80: Manage the Trade                                           257
         Resources                                                             259


         CHAPTER 9           Lessons from Trading
                             Professionals: Resources and
                             Perspectives on Self-Coaching                     261

         Lesson 81: Leverage Core Competencies and
            Cultivate Creativity                                               261
         Lesson 82: I Alone Am Responsible                                     264
         Lesson 83: Cultivate Self-Awareness                                   271
         Lesson 84: Mentor Yourself for Success                                275
         Lesson 85: Keep Detailed Records                                      279
         Lesson 86: Learn to Be Fallible                                       283
         Lesson 87: The Power of Research                                      286
         Lesson 88: Attitudes and Goals, the Building Blocks
            of Success                                                         290
         Lesson 89: A View from the Trading Firms                              295
         Lesson 90: Use Data to Improve Trading Performance                    300
         Resources                                                             305


         CHAPTER 10 Looking for the Edge: Finding
                    Historical Patterns in Markets                             307

         Lesson 91: Use Historical Patterns in Trading                         308
         Lesson 92: Frame Good Hypotheses with the Right Data                  310
         Lesson 93: Excel Basics                                               313
         Lesson 94: Visualize Your Data                                        317
         Lesson 95: Create Your Independent and
            Dependent Variables                                                320
         Lesson 96: Conduct Your Historical Investigations                     324

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009   15:45   Printer: Yet to come




          xii                                                                 CONTENTS



          Lesson 97: Code the Data                                                327
          Lesson 98: Examine Context                                              329
          Lesson 99: Filter Data                                                  332
          Lesson 100: Make Use of Your Findings                                   334
          Resources                                                               336

          CONCLUSION                                                             339

          Lesson 101: Find Your Path                                              339
          For More on Self-Coaching                                               341


          About the Author                                                       343

          Index                                                                  345

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    15:45    Printer: Yet to come




                                     Preface


                he goal of The Daily Trading Coach is to teach you as much as possi-

         T      ble about coaching, so that you can mentor yourself to success in the
                financial markets. The key word in the title is “Daily.” This book is de-
         signed to be a resource that you can use every day to build upon strengths
         and overcome weaknesses.
              After writing two books—The Psychology of Trading and Enhancing
         Trader Performance—and penning more than 1,800 posts for the Trader-
         Feed blog (www.traderfeed.blogspot.com/), I thought I had pretty well cov-
         ered the terrain of trading psychology. Now, just three years after the pub-
         lication of the performance book, I’ve once again taken electronic pen to
         paper, completing a trading psychology trilogy by focusing on the process
         of coaching.
              Two realities led to The Daily Trading Coach. First, a review of the
         traffic patterns on the TraderFeed blog revealed that a large number of
         readers—about a third—were accessing the site during the hour or so im-
         mediately prior to the market open. I found this interesting, as most of the
         posts do not offer specific trading advice. Rather, posts deal with topics of
         psychology and performance—ones that should be relevant at any hour of
         the day.
              When I asked a group of trusted readers about this pattern, they re-
         sponded that they were using the blog as a kind of surrogate trading
         coach. Reviewing the posts was their way of reminding themselves of their
         plans and intentions before going entering the financial battlefield. This
         was confirmed when I gathered statistics about the most popular (and com-
         mented upon) posts on the blog. The majority were practical posts dealing
         with trading psychology. Most were uplifting in content, even as they chal-
         lenged the assumptions of readers. It seemed as though traders were look-
         ing for coaching and finding some measure of it in the blog.
              The second reality shaping this book involves digital publication and
         the rapid changes sweeping the publishing world. To this point, relatively
         few electronic books (e-books) have been offered to traders. When those
         books are available, they are little more than screen versions of the print


                                                                                    xiii

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     15:45    Printer: Yet to come




          xiv                                                                      PREFACE



          text. Despite the allure and convenience of electronic publishing, few
          traders I consulted actually sought out or used e-books. The most common
          complaint among traders was that they did not want to spend hours de-
          vouring information in front of a screen after a full day of trading. I quickly
          realized that participants in the financial markets don’t use the electronic
          medium in the same way that they engage print text. That led me to think
          about writing a different kind of book, one better suited to publishing’s
          electronic frontier, but also useable in print.
               When you overlay these two observations, you can appreciate the vi-
          sion that led to this text: a “trading coach in a book” that can be as easily
          read on the screen as on paper. The goal was to integrate blog and book
          content by creating practical “lessons” that help traders become their own
          trading coaches. There are 101 lessons in The Daily Trading Coach, aver-
          aging several pages in length. Each lesson follows a general format, iden-
          tifying a trading challenge, an approach to meeting that challenge, and a
          specific suggestion or assignment for working on the issue. The chapters
          are independent of one another: you can read them in order, or you can use
          the table of contents or index to read, each day, the lesson that most ap-
          plies to your current trading. Unlike a traditional book, the idea is not to
          read it through from front to back in a few sittings. Rather, you take one
          lesson at a time and apply it to guide your development as a trader. Like
          the blog, it’s an on-screen reminder of what to do when you’re at your best,
          but—more than the blog—it’s also a roadmap (and practical set of insights
          and tools) for discovering and implementing the best within you.
               My ambition has been to pack into these 101 lessons more useable in-
          formation and practical methods than might be found in any number of
          expensive seminars and coaching sessions, at far less expense. Too often,
          the goal of the seminar providers and coaches is to convert you into ongo-
          ing clients. The intent of this book is just the opposite: to give you the tools
          to become your own coach, so that you can guide your own professional
          and personal growth. In other words, this is a manual of psychoeducation:
          a how-to guide for improving yourself and your performance.
               One thing I particularly like about the electronic format is that it en-
          ables a writer to link the book content to a vast array of material on the
          Web. I will be adding material to The Daily Trading Coach via a dedicated
          blog called Become Your Own Trading Coach (www.becomeyourown
          tradingcoach.blogspot.com), so that this book will grow over time. You
          will need only to click the e-book links to access free updated information
          and methods on the Become Your Own Trading Coach site. There is one
          master page on the blog for each chapter of this book containing the links
          relevant to that chapter’s material. At the end of each chapter, there is also
          a resource page that alerts readers to further links and readings. I will be
          adding audio and video content to the new blog over time, which should be

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009    15:45     Printer: Yet to come




         Preface                                                                     xv


         particularly helpful for those who learn best by seeing and hearing ideas.
         Once publishing becomes electronic, there’s no reason that every text can’t
         be a multimedia learning experience.
              You’ll notice from the table of contents that each of the 10 chapters
         contains 10 lessons. Those chapters cover a range of topics relevant to
         trading psychology and trading performance, including specific lessons for
         utilizing psychodynamic, cognitive, and behavioral brief therapy methods
         to change problematic behavior patterns and instill new, positive ones.
         The final two chapters are especially unique: Chapter 9 consists of self-
         coaching perspectives from 18 successful trading professionals who share
         their work online. Chapter 10 fulfills a long-standing promise to Trader-
         Feed readers, walking traders through the basics of identifying historical
         patterns using Excel. Each lesson is accompanied by homework activities
         and suggestions (“Coaching Cues”) to help with application of the ideas.
         Major ideas are set apart within the text for quick review and scanning. At
         the end of each chapter is a list of resources to guide your further inquiry
         into the book’s topics and ideas.
              Yes, the aim of the book is to help you become your own trading coach,
         but a glance at the chapter and lesson titles reveals that the broader pur-
         pose is to help you coach yourself through life. The challenges and uncer-
         tainties we face in trading—the pursuit of rewards in the face of risks—are
         just as present in careers and relationships as in markets. Techniques that
         help you master yourself as a trader will serve you well in any field of en-
         deavor. In that sense, the goal is not just to make money in the markets, it
         is to prosper in all of life’s undertakings. I will be gratified and honored if
         this book is a resource toward your own prosperity, in and out of financial
         markets.

                                                                 B RETT S TEENBARGER

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009     15:45   Printer: Yet to come




                                               xvi

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    15:45    Printer: Yet to come




                     Acknowledgments


             f, as the saying goes, it takes a village to raise a child, it takes a small

         I   army to write a book. The last lesson of the book is dedicated to my
             mother, Constance Steenbarger, who passed away last year. My deepest
         hope is that this book carries forward the nurturing spirit that she brought
         to her family and students.
              If my mother represented nurturance in my life, my father, Jack Steen-
         barger, has embodied the virtues of hard work, achievement, and love
         of family. From the earliest days of my training as a psychologist, I have
         been fascinated by the psychology of exemplary achievement: what makes
         highly successful people tick. There’s no question where that passionate
         interest originated, and it gives me the greatest of pleasure to acknowledge
         my father for that inspiration.
              None of this would be possible, however, without the understanding,
         love, and support of my wife Margie. In 1984, I traded bachelorhood for a
         life with Margie and her family; to this day, it remains my one superlative
         trade. Twenty-five years later, I’m pleased to report we’re still riding that
         trend, having taken no heat whatsoever!
              I’m saddened, but happy at the same time, to be able to dedicate this
         book to the memory of my uncle, Arnold Rustin, MD, who also passed away
         during the year. A consummate teacher, Arnold represented everything I’ve
         admired and enjoyed in the world of academic medicine. It’s the support
         of Arnold and his wife Rose, even amid their own challenges, which made
         the greatest impression on me, however. I hope their inspiration finds ex-
         pression in this book.
              Thanks, too, to Debi, Steve, Lea, Laura, Ed, Devon, and Macrae, the
         kids who aren’t kids any more, but who have been remarkably understand-
         ing of my hours on the road meeting with traders and my even greater hours
         online, keeping up with a blog and dozens of e-mail and phone calls daily. I
         would not be so grounded without family, including my brother Marc and
         sister-in-law Lisa and our three feline friends: Gina, Ginger, and Mali.
              To the traders and authors who contributed to Chapter 9, my deep-
         est thanks and appreciation for your great work. You provide unparalleled


                                                                                    xvii

P1: JYS
fm     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   15:45    Printer: Yet to come




          xviii                                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



          resources for developing traders. Acknowledgments are also due to those
          whose work has inspired my own: philosophers Ayn Rand, Brand Blan-
          shard, Colin Wilson, and G. I. Gurdjieff; the many psychologists and re-
          searchers who have contributed to the brief therapy and positive psychol-
          ogy literatures; and the traders who were formative in my development:
          Victor Niederhoffer, Linda Raschke, Chuck McElveen, and the many hedge
          fund traders I’ve been privileged to work with in the past few years. My
          colleagues at Upstate Medical University have been inspirational and sup-
          portive throughout my second career; special thanks to Mantosh Dewan,
          MD; Roger Greenberg, PhD; and John Manring, MD.
              This is also my opportunity for a shout-out to those who write and
          play the music that kept me company through the writing of this book:
          Edenbridge, Armin van Buuren, Ferry Corsten, Cruxshadows, Assemblage
          23, VNV Nation, and many others that you may discover on the Become
          Your Own Trading Coach blog.
              Deepest thanks, as well, to the Wiley production staff and my fantastic
          and supportive editors, Pamela van Giessen, Kate Wood, and Emilie Her-
          man. They’ve been tremendously helpful in bringing this book to life. My
          appreciation also goes out to the many readers of the blog, particularly
          those who have actively participated with their comments and insights.
          I hope this book contributes to your continued happiness and trading
          success.

P1: JYS
intro   JWBT039-Steenbarger      November 24, 2008      21:25    Printer: Yet to come




                              Introduction


                oo few of us are play-actors of our own ideals. We have strengths and

         T      talents, dreams and aspirations. But when we look hour-by-hour, day-
                by-day, not many of these ideals are concretely expressed. The days
         become months, then years, and—at some sad juncture—we look back on
         life and wonder where it went.
              That could be you: the middle-age person looking back on how “I
         could’ve been a contender.” Or, you could live a different life script. You
         could become the actor of your ideals and live their realization.
              If you’re thinking this is a strange introduction to a trading text, you’re
         right. This book doesn’t start with supply and demand, trading patterns, or
         money management. It begins with you and what you want from your life.
         Trading, in this context, is more than buying, selling, and hedging: it is a
         vehicle for self-mastery and development.
              Every trader, whether he consciously identifies it or not, is an en-
         trepreneur. Traders open their business and compete in a marketplace.
         They identify and pursue opportunity, even as they preserve their capi-
         tal. Traders refine and expand their craft; they take calculated risks. As
         entrepreneurs, traders start with the premise that they bring value to the
         marketplace. Amid the inevitable disappointments and setbacks, the long
         hours and the limited resources, the risk and uncertainty, it can be difficult
         to sustain that optimism. It is so much easier than to keep one’s visions on
         a shelf and forego the daily efforts of enacting ideals.
              Some traders, however, cannot shelve their aspirations. Like the moth,
         they’ll pursue distant lights even if it means an occasional singe. To those
         noble souls, I dedicate this book.
              When I work with traders and portfolio managers at hedge funds, pro-
         prietary trading firms, and investment banks, I don’t tell them how to trade.
         Most of them trade strategies different from my own and know far more
         about their markets than I ever will. Rather, I figure out their strengths. I
         learn what these traders and managers do well and how they do it, and I
         help them build a career out of what they’re already good at. Just as fish
         cannot comprehend water, being immersed in it from birth, we typically


                                                                                        1

P1: JYS
intro   JWBT039-Steenbarger     November 24, 2008      21:25     Printer: Yet to come




         2                                                                INTRODUCTION



         lack an appreciation of our personal assets. Each of us is a curious mix-
         ture of skills, talents, strengths, conflicts, and weaknesses. But just as a
         new business must capitalize on the strengths of its founders, a career in
         the markets crucially hinges on the assets—personal and monetary—of the
         trader. As a coach, my role is to take traders out of their psychological wa-
         ter and help them see what has been around them all along: the assets that
         can provide a lifetime of dividends.
               Never has self-coaching been more important for traders. As I write
         this, we have witnessed levels of market volatility unseen in the post-World
         War II period. Price volatility brings potential opportunity, but also risk.
         Traders who could not step back, recognize unfolding developments, and
         make adjustments have lost significant money. Those who have used the
         crisis to step out of the trading water, limit risk, and find fresh opportunity
         are the ones who are poised to reap those career dividends.
               The book you are reading is intended to be your companion in this trad-
         ing journey. It is organized in 101 lessons. Each lesson outlines a challenge
         and proposes a specific exercise for moving yourself forward with respect
         to that challenge. The lessons are intended as meditations to begin your
         trading day—coaching communications to help you enact the best within
         you. Eventually, as you read and live these lessons, the coaching commu-
         nications become your own self-talk. You begin by play-acting the book’s
         ideals and end up living them and shaping them into your own. You become
         your own trading psychologist.
               If reading a short passage each day and planting the right ideas into
         your forebrain helps you prioritize your life and trading goals—and if that
         in turn helps you make one less bad trade per week and take the one good
         one you would have otherwise missed—think of how you will personally
         and financially profit. But just as pills can’t work when they stay in a bottle,
         no one learns from an unopened book. The first step in becoming your own
         trading psychologist is to set time aside for self-mentorship—every day,
         every week—because that’s how behavior patterns turn into habits. The
         great individual is simply one who has made a habit of self-development.
               So there they are, staring at you from the shelf across the room: Your
         ideals, all those things you’ve wanted to do in life. You look longingly to-
         ward the shelf, but you can’t reach it from your comfortable chair. Yet you
         hold a book in your hands. Perhaps that book can make that chair just a
         little less comfortable, place the shelf just a bit closer.
               You turn the page.
               The next step is ours.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 1




                                     Change
                          The Process and the Practice




                    The mind has exactly the same power as the hands;
                    not merely to grasp the world, but to change it.
                                                          —Colin Wilson



                 ou are reading this book because you want to coach yourself to

         Y       greater success in the financial markets. But what is coaching?
               At the root of all coaching efforts is change. When you are your own
          trading coach, you are trying to effect changes in your thoughts, your feel-
          ings, and your behavior. Most of all, you are trying to change how you trade:
          how you identify and act upon patterns of risk and reward, supply and
          demand.
               There is a rich literature regarding change, grounded in extensive psy-
          chological research and practice. If you understand how change occurs,
          you are better positioned to act as your own change agent. In this chap-
          ter, we will explore the research and practice of change and how you
          can best make use of its sometimes-surprising conclusions. Coaching is
          about making change happen, not just letting it happen. It’s about mak-
          ing the commitment to being a change agent in your own life, your own
          trading.
               First, however, let’s learn about the process and practice of change.




                                                                                     3

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          4                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 1: DRAW ON EMOTION
          TO BECOME A CHANGE AGENT

          For some of us, the status quo is not enough. We experience glimpses into
          the person we’re capable of being; we yearn to be more than we are in life’s
          mundane moments.
               That yearning starts with the notion of change. We desire changes in
          our lives. We adapt—we grow—by making the right kinds of changes. All
          too often, however, we feel stuck. We’re doing the same things, making the
          same mistakes again and again. Do we wait for life to change us, or do we
          become agents of our own life changes?
               The easy part is initiating a change process. The real challenge is sus-
          taining change. How many times does an alcoholic take the initial steps
          toward sobriety, only to relapse? How often do we start diets and exercise
          programs, only to return to our slothful ways? If we focus on starting a
          change process, we leave ourselves unprepared for the next crucial steps:
          keeping the flame of change burning bright.
               The flaw with most popular writings and practices in psychology and
          coaching is that they are designed to initiate change. These writings and
          practices leave people feeling good—until it becomes apparent that differ-
          ent efforts are needed to sustain change. Successful coaching doesn’t just
          catalyze change: it turns change efforts into habit patterns that become sec-
          ond nature. The key to successful coaching is turning change into routine;
          making new behaviors become second nature.
               That’s where emotion comes in.
               For years I had attempted—unsuccessfully—to sustain a weight loss
          program. Then, in the year 2000, I was diagnosed with Type II diabetes.
          My diet had to change; I needed to lose weight. If I didn’t, I realized with
          crystal clarity, I could lose my health and let my wife and children down.
          Literally that same day I began a dietary regimen that continues to this day.
          My weight dropped 40 pounds (I shed the pounds so quickly that friends
          were concerned that I had a wasting illness) and I regained control of my
          blood sugar.
               What was the catalyst for the change? Years of telling myself to eat
          differently, exercise more, and lose weight produced absolutely no results.
          A single emotional experience of the necessity for change, however, made
          all the difference. I didn’t just think I needed to change: I knew it with every
          fiber of my being. I felt it.
               So it is with traders.
               Perhaps you’ve told yourself that you need to follow your rules, that
          you need to trade smaller, or that you should avoid trading during certain
          market conditions or times of day. Still you make the same mistakes, lose

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                     5


          money, and build frustration. Like my initial efforts at weight loss, your
          attempts at change fail because they lack emotional force.
               Research into the process of successful versus unsuccessful therapy
          finds that emotional experience—not talk—powers change. No one ever
          felt valuable and lovable by standing in front of a mirror and reciting self-
          enhancing statements. The experience of a meaningful romantic relation-
          ship, however, yields the deepest of affirmations. Yes, you can tell your-
          self you’re competent, but experiencing success in the face of challenge
          provides a lasting sense of efficacy. Pleasure, pain: nature hardwires us
          to internalize emotional experience so that we can pursue what enhances
          life and avoid what harms us. That ability to internalize our most powerful
          emotional experiences helps us to sustain the changes we initiate.


              The enemy of change is relapse: falling back into old, unproduc-
              tive ways of thinking and behaving. Without the momentum of
              emotion, relapse is the norm.


               Are you going to work on yourself as a trader today? Are you go-
          ing to use today as an opportunity to learn and develop yourself, regard-
          less of the day’s profitability? If so, you’ll need a goal for the day. What
          are you going to work on: Building a strength? Correcting a weakness?
          Repeating something you did well yesterday? Avoiding one of yesterday’s
          mistakes?
               An important first step is to set the goal. We cannot succeed as change
          agents if we don’t perceive a clear path from the person we are to the per-
          son we wish to become. A valuable second step is to write down the goal
          or talk out loud into a recorder. This step helps cement desired changes in
          your mind. But will the pursuit of your goal truly possess emotional force?
          Will it transform you from one who thinks about change to one who truly
          becomes a change agent?
               The secret to goal setting is providing your goals with emotional
          force. If your goal is a want, you’ll pursue it until the feeling of desire
          subsides. If your goal is a must-have—a burning need, like my dietary
          change—it becomes an organizing principle, a life focus. You won’t be-
          come a better trader because you want to be. You will only coach yourself
          to success when self-improvement becomes your organizing principle: a
          must-have need.
               Try this exercise. Before you start trading, seat yourself comfortably
          and enter into a nice slow rhythm of deep breathing. Imagine yourself—as
          vividly as you can—starting your trading day. Watch the market move on

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          6                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          the screen; watch yourself tracking the market, your day’s trading ideas at
          your side. Then turn your goal for the day into part of your visualization:
          imagine yourself performing the actions that concretely put that goal into
          practice. If your goal is to control your position sizing, vividly imagine your-
          self entering orders at the proper size; if your goal is to enter long positions
          only after a pullback, imagine yourself patiently waiting for the pullback
          and then executing the trade. As you visualize yourself realizing your goal,
          recall the feeling of pride that comes from realizing one of your objectives.
          Bask in the glow of living up to one of your ideals. Let yourself feel proud
          of what you’ve accomplished.
               It’s important not just to have goals, but also to directly experience
          yourself as capable of reaching those goals. Psychologists call that self-
          efficacy. You are most likely to experience yourself as a success if you
          see yourself as successful and feel the joys of success. You don’t need to
          imagine yourself making oodles of money; that’s not realistic as a daily
          goal. But you can immerse yourself in images of reaching the goals of good
          trading and experience the feelings of self-control, mastery, and pride that
          come from enacting the best within you.


              We are most likely to make and sustain changes when we perceive
              ourselves as efficacious: capable of making those changes.


               Many traders only get to the point of self-coaching after they have ex-
          perienced harrowing losses. The reason is similar to my experience with
          my diagnosis: it was the vivid fear of consequences—the intense feeling of
          not wanting to ruin my life—that drove my dietary change. Similarly, after
          traders lost a good deal of their capital, they never want to experience that
          again. They trade well, not because they talk themselves into discipline,
          but because they feel the emotional force of discipline’s absence.
               Contrary to the teachings of proponents of positive thinking, fear has
          its uses. Many an alcoholic maintains sobriety because of the fear of
          returning to the pain of drinking’s consequences. Emotion sustains the
          change.
               With guided imagery that you feel as well as see, you can create power-
          ful emotional experiences—and catalyze change—every single day. That’s
          when you become a change agent: one who sustains a process of transfor-
          mation. The key is adding emotional force to your goals. Your assignment
          is to take those lifeless goals off the piece of paper in your journal and turn
          them into vivid, powerful movies that fill your mind. Try it with one goal,
          one movie in your head, before you start trading. It is not enough to set
          goals; you must feel them to live them.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                         7


                      COACHING CUE

          To each of your goals, add an or else scenario. Vividly imagine the consequences
          of not sustaining your change. Relive in detail speciﬁc failure experiences that
          resulted from the faulty behavior you want to change. When you add an or else
          condition to your goal setting, you turn fear into motivation. The brain is wired
          to respond ﬁrst and foremost to danger; you will not gravitate toward the wrong
          behaviors if you’re emotionally connected to their danger. To this day, my diet
          is ﬁrmly in place. Fear has become my friend.




          LESSON 2: PSYCHOLOGICAL VISIBILITY
          AND YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH YOUR
          TRADING COACH

          If you are to be your own trading coach and guide your trading develop-
          ment, we have to make you the best coach you can possibly be. That means
          understanding what makes coaching work—and what will make it work
          for you.
               Research informs us that the most important ingredient in psy-
          chological change is the quality of the relationship between the helper
          and the person receiving help. Techniques are important, but ultimately
          those techniques are channeled through a human relationship. Studies find
          that in successful counseling, helpers are experienced as warm, caring,
          and supportive. When helpers are seen as hostile or disinterested, change
          processes go nowhere. There’s a good reason for this: relationships pos-
          sess magic.
               The magic of relationships is that they provide us with our most imme-
          diate experiences of visibility. I recently took a phone call from a reader of
          the TraderFeed blog. Many readers have provided valuable feedback about
          the blog, but this caller went far beyond that. He read every single post and
          then explained to me why he was drawn to the site. He put into words the
          very values that have led me to publish some 1,800 posts in the space of less
          than three years: the vision that, in cultivating our trading, we develop
          ourselves in ways that ripple throughout our lives.
               At the end of that conversation, I felt understood: I was visible to an-
          other human being. When my mother died, I kept my composure until I ap-
          proached her gravesite; then I lost it. My two children instinctively reached
          out to comfort me. It’s something I would have done for another person in
          that situation. At that moment, I saw a bit of myself in my children. Once
          again, I was visible.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          8                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               An unfulfilling relationship is one in which we feel invisible. We can
          feel invisible because we’re misunderstood or mistreated. We feel invisible
          when the things that matter most to us find no recognition among others.
          I recall one particularly unfulfilling relationship with a woman. We were
          on the dance floor at a club and I suddenly stopped dancing altogether. She
          didn’t notice at all. She was in her own world. It was a perfect metaphor for
          everything I was experiencing at the time: I was there as a kind of prop, a
          rationale for being on the dance floor. No one was really dancing with me.
          The profound, wrenching emptiness that I felt at that time was a turning
          point; never again would I settle for invisibility.
               In Iggy Pop’s classic song, invisibility is a kind of “Isolation.” But if
          there’s anything worse than being isolated—crying for love—when you’re
          with someone, it’s being isolated from yourself. We are truly lost when
          we’re invisible to ourselves.


              Many traders don’t really know what they do best; they’re invisible
              to themselves.


               All of us have values, dreams, and ideals. How often, however, are
          these explicitly on our minds? To live mired in routine, day in and day
          out, estranged from the things that matter most to us: that’s a form of in-
          visibility. To compromise the things you love in the name of practicality,
          to settle for second best out of fear or convenience: those, too, leave us in
          isolation—from ourselves. Strange as it may seem, we spend much of our
          time invisible to ourselves. The day-to-day part of us dances away, oblivi-
          ous to the other self, the one that thrives on purpose and meaning.
               It’s a real dilemma: How can we possibly coach ourselves to success if
          the very strengths that would bring us success are invisible to us? After all,
          the single best predictor of change is the quality of the helping relationship.
          What, then, is our relationship to ourselves? If we are to be our own trading
          coaches, the success of our efforts rests on our ability to sustain visibility
          and draw on the magic of a fulfilling relationship with ourselves.
               To coach ourselves successfully, we must be visible to ourselves and
          sustain the vision of who we are and what we value. But how can we do
          that? There’s a simple strategy that can build a positive, visible relationship
          with your inner trading coach: identify a single trading strength to express
          as a goal for the coming day’s trading.
               One way I do that when I coach others (and when I work on my
          own trading) is to ask traders to identify what they did best in yester-
          day’s trading that they want to continue today. Set a positive goal, based
          on strengths, to keep you in touch with the best within you. It affirms
          your competencies and keeps these visible, even during challenging mar-
          ket times. Too many of our goals are negative: we declare that we won’t do

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                         9


          X or that we’ll do less of Y. Instead, frame a goal for today that says: “Here
          is what I’m good at, here’s what I did best yesterday, and here’s how I’m
          going to make use of that strength today.”

              Trading goals should reflect trading strengths.

               In the relationship between you the trader and you the coach, the qual-
          ity of the relationship will play an important role in your development. The
          best relationship is achieved when goals are linked to values and ex-
          press distinctive strengths. Relentlessly identify, repeat, and expand what
          you do best—even (and especially) after the worst of trading days. Only
          through repetition can we turn positive behaviors into habit patterns. When
          you are in the habit of identifying and building strengths, you will then be
          truly visible to you. The magic of that relationship—and the confidence it
          brings—will sustain you through the most challenging times.


                      COACHING CUE

          Review the last week’s entries in your trading journal. Count the number of pos-
          itive, encouraging phrases in your writings and the number of negative, critical
          ones. If the ratio of positive to negative messages is less than one, you know
          you aren’t sustaining a healthy relationship with your inner coach. And if you’re
          not keeping a journal, your coach is silent. What sort of relationship is that?




          LESSON 3: MAKE FRIENDS WITH YOUR
          WEAKNESS

          The notion of change is a challenge and a trap. It challenges us to aspire
          to more than who we are, but it can also trap us in self-division. When we
          entertain the notion of change, we divide ourselves into qualities we like
          and those we don’t. We parcel ourselves into strengths and weaknesses,
          good and bad, acceptable and unacceptable.
               Once we make such a division, it is only natural to embrace the good
          and avoid the bad. We dismiss our shortcomings as mistakes, bad luck, or
          exceptions. That helps us identify with a partial image of ourselves and
          keep our frailties from our conscious awareness. Thus banished from the
          front of our minds, those frailties cannot guide our learning. We do not
          sustain the motivation to grow, because we only contact the parts of our-
          selves that are relatively whole.
              Suppose I manage a position poorly because of frustration and I exceed
               my loss limit on the trade, leaving me in the red for the day. I finish flat

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          10                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          for the week, however, and instead focus on that fact. The loss is soon
          forgotten. It doesn’t bother me, but I also don’t learn from it. The next time
          frustration hits, I repeat my earlier behavior and lose even more money.
          Disgusted, I decide to take a break from the markets and come back with a
          positive mindset. In reality, however, I merely return in denial, once again
          banishing the losses from my mind. Eventually those trading shortcomings
          catch up to us, forcing us to face them squarely.
               Such self-division is often maintained with the fiction of positive think-
          ing. By focusing on positive thoughts, we don’t have to think about what
          we’ve done wrong; we don’t have to achieve contact with the parts of our-
          selves we don’t like. We become like rooms where the clutter is increas-
          ingly swept under the rug. Eventually our rooms bulge with mental clutter,
          making them uninhabitable.


               The motivation for much positive thinking is a denial of weakness.


               Our daughter Devon was born with a “strawberry” beside her nose: a
          hemangioma that was a bright red bump on her skin. We were told that it
          would eventually recede on its own, that no surgery was needed. During
          her early years, however, baby Devon had a large red mark on her face. We
          could have put a patch over the mark or insisted on surgery, but we didn’t.
          It was her mark, and it was part of what made her who she was. When
          you love someone, even her personal blemishes become endearing. Before
          I was a parent, I used to wonder how I’d tolerate changing dirty diapers.
          When the time came, I actually enjoyed it. It was something I was doing
          with and for my child. The changing of the diaper became an opportunity
          for bonding.
               So it should be when we deal with our own dirty diapers. Your weak-
          nesses are part of you; someone who loves you will love the whole package,
          frailties and all. And if you love yourself, you can reach that point of ac-
          ceptance in which you are fully aware of your shortcomings and appreci-
          ate your very humanness. Indeed, as with the diapers, those shortcomings
          become opportunities—to reach out to yourself and guide your own devel-
          opment. For the longest time, I was unsure of myself in social situations
          and avoided most of them. Then, in a college dorm party I pushed myself
          to organize, I noticed a few people standing around not talking with oth-
          ers. In a flash, I saw myself in them. I made a beeline for the stragglers,
          included them in the gathering, and introduced them around. Ever since,
          I’ve been able to reach out to that reticence in myself and use it as a prod
          to engage others. My development occurred not through positive thinking,
          but through an embrace of my vulnerability.
               Have you lost money recently? Have your trading weaknesses cost you
          money and opportunity? Consider embracing your flaws: every losing trade

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                         11


          is there to teach you something. At the close of today’s trading, create
          a chart with three columns. The first column is a description of the los-
          ing trade you made; the second column will be what you can learn from
          the losing trade; and the third column will be how you will improve your
          trading the next day based on what you learned. What you learned from
          the losing trade might be an insight into the market—perhaps it was range-
          bound when you assumed it was trending. That insight could help you
          frame subsequent trades. Alternatively, what you learn from the losing
          trade might be something about yourself; perhaps an insight into how you
          can manage risk more effectively. Either way, your losing trade is never
          a total loss as long as you embrace it and learn from it.

              Much of self-coaching success is finding the opportunity in
              adversity.

              When you create a trading diary, you bring yourself face to face with
          your worst trading and turn it into opportunity. It doesn’t matter if blem-
          ishes mar your account statement. It’s your account, red marks and all.
          You make yourself stronger when you reach out to your flaws. Embrace
          who you are and you take the first step to becoming the person you are
          capable of being.


                      COACHING CUE

          As we’ll see in the next chapter, the research of James Pennebaker suggests that
          giving voice to stressful events—in a journal or out loud—for at least a half hour
          a day is instrumental in our putting those events into perspective and moving
          beyond them. When you experience a horriﬁc trading day, give it voice. Talk it
          through and sear its lessons in your mind. If you’re in touch with how badly
          your trading makes you feel, you’re least likely to repeat your errors. There can
          be gain in embracing pain.




          LESSON 4: CHANGE YOUR
          ENVIRONMENT, CHANGE YOURSELF

          Human beings adapt to their environments. We draw on a range of skills
          and personality traits to fit into various settings. That is why we can behave
          one way in a social setting and then seem like a totally different human
          being at work. One of the enduring attractions of travel is that it takes us
          out of our native environments and forces us to adapt to new people, new
          cultures, and new ways. When we make those adaptations, we discover

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          12                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          new facets of ourselves. As we’ll see shortly, discrepancy is the mother of
          all change: when we are in the same environments, we tend to draw upon
          the same, routine modes of thought and behavior.
               A few months ago I had an attack of acute appendicitis while stay-
          ing in a LaGuardia airport hotel awaiting a return flight to Chicago. When
          I went to the nearest emergency room at Elmhurst Hospital outside
          Jackson Heights, Queens, I found that I was seemingly the only native
          English speaker in a sea of people awaiting medical care. After some dif-
          ficulty attracting attention, I was admitted to the hospital and spent the
          next several days of recuperation navigating my way through patients and
          staff of every conceivable nationality. By the end of the experience, I felt at
          home there. I’ve since stayed at the same airport hotel and routinely make
          visits into the surrounding neighborhoods—areas I would have never in my
          wildest dreams ventured into previously. In adapting to that environment,
          I discovered hidden strengths. I also overcame more than a few hidden
          prejudices and fears.
               The greatest enemy of change is routine. When we lapse into routine
          and operate on autopilot, we are no longer fully and actively conscious of
          what we’re doing and why. That is why some of the most fertile situations
          for personal growth—those that occur within new environments—are
          those that force us to exit our routines and actively master unfamiliar
          challenges.

               In familiar environments and routines, we operate on autopilot.
               Nothing changes.

               When you act as your own trading coach, your challenge is
          to stay fully conscious, alert to risk and opportunity. One of your
          greatest threats will be the autopilot mode in which you act without think-
          ing, without full awareness of your situation. If you shift your trading
          environment, you push yourself to adapt to new situations: you break
          routines. If your environment is always the same, you will find yourself
          gravitating to the same thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. We are mired in
          repetitive patterns of thought and behavior because we are mired in rou-
          tines: the same emotional and physical environments. Indeed, we repeat
          the same patterns—for better or for worse—precisely because those pat-
          terns are adaptations to our current settings.
               So how can we change our trading environments? The key is recogniz-
          ing that our physical settings are only a part of our surroundings. Here are
          a few routine-busting activities that can alert us to risks and possibilities:
           1. Seek Out Divergent Views. Conversations with traders who trade
               differently from you—different time frames, markets, or styles—can
               often help cement your views or question them. Similarly, reading

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      13

              materials from fresh perspectives puts your ideas in a different light
              and pushes you to question your assumptions. I remained relatively
              bullish on the stock market’s longer-term picture into the final quar-
              ter of 2007. Only when I pushed myself to read informed views
              that clashed with my own—and consulting data that did not fit my
              framework—did I modify my perspectives and avoid significant losses.
           2. Examine the Big Picture. It’s easy to get lost in the market’s
              short-term picture; how it is trading that minute, that day. I find it
              important to periodically zoom out to longer-term charts and place
              the current action into context. Indeed, some of the best trading ideas
              start with a big picture view and then proceed to shorter-term execu-
              tion. I especially find this to be the case when looking at longer-term
              support/resistance, trading ranges, and Market Profile value areas.
              Often, shifting my field of vision will help me avoid an ill-informed,
              reactive trade based on the market’s last few ticks. If something seems
              obvious in the market, switch time frames and generate an entirely
              new perspective. What looks obvious from one view may well be
              obviously wrong from another.
           3. Examine Related Views. Sometimes the action of a single stock or
              sector will illuminate what’s happening in the broader market; one cur-
              rency cross will break out ahead of others. Are we seeing a broad fixed
              income rally, or is the yield curve steepening or flattening? Looking
              across instruments and asset classes keeps us from getting locked into
              ways of thinking. I find myself tracking sector ETFs during the trad-
              ing day to see if stocks are moving in a single direction (trending) or
              are taking different paths within a range. If I see bond traders fleeing
              to safety or assuming risk, I can anticipate selling or buying stocks.
              Seeing the entire financial playing field helps keep us from becoming
              wedded to preconceived ideas.
           4. Take the Break. Just as we take vacations to return to work re-
              freshed, a break from the screen can help us generate fresh market
              views. It is easy to become focused on what is most dramatic and
              salient in markets. Pull back and clear out the head to help you see
              what’s not obvious and then profit by the time it’s recognized by oth-
              ers. I find breaks especially helpful following losing trades, enabling us
              to reflect on the losses and what can be learned from them.

              If your environment is comfortable, it probably isn’t conducive to
              change.

              In short, it’s the mental routines—the mental environment—that we
          most need to change to break unwanted and unprofitable patterns of
          thought and behavior. When you’re your own trading coach, you learn to

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          14                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          think, but also to think about your thinking. Incorporate a fresh look at self
          and markets each day to inspire new ideas, challenge stale ones, and tap
          sources of energy and inspiration that otherwise remain hidden in routine.
          As with my adventure in Queens, you may find that the most exotic changes
          bring out your finest adaptations.


                     COACHING CUE

          Many times it’s the market views we most scorn that we need to take most
          seriously, because at some level we’re ﬁnding them threatening. Seek out com-
          mentary from those you most disagree with and ask yourself what you would be
          seeing in the markets if that commentary proves to be correct. If you’re quick
          to dismiss a market view, give it a second look. You wouldn’t need to be so de-
          fensive if you didn’t sense something plausible—and dangerous—in the views
          you’re dismissing.



          LESSON 5: TRANSFORM EMOTION BY
          TRACE-FORMATION

          When traders seek coaching, they are usually troubled by a particular emo-
          tional state that affects their decision-making: anger, frustration, anxiety,
          or doubt. Their goal is to change how they feel, but they don’t know how to
          accomplish that. Sometimes traders even view their emotions as fixed and
          unchanging aspects of personality: “It’s just the way I am.”
              It is true that our traits and temperaments affect how we experience
          the world. They also play an important role in defining the range of our
          emotions. Some people feel things—good and bad—very strongly; others
          are quite even-keeled. Neuroticism, the tendency to experience negative
          emotions, is one of the big five personality traits identified by researchers.
          Like all such traits, it has a strong hereditary component. Though we like
          to think of ourselves as masters of our fates, the sobering reality is that
          much of our emotional experience is hardwired.
              Does that mean we can’t change how we feel in particular situa-
          tions? Not at all. If psychological methods can help people overcome post-
          traumatic stresses and anxiety disorders, they certainly can help us master
          our feelings in normal life situations. For the most part, we cannot change
          personality, but we can change how our personalities are expressed.
              The trap many traders fall into is trying to control feelings with
          thoughts. We attempt to talk ourselves into feeling better or differently.
          Rarely does that work. When people are grieving over losses, telling
          them they’ll be okay doesn’t really touch what they’re experiencing. The

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                     15

          feelings express a psychological reality; asserting a logical reality ignores
          the personal meaning and significance of the situation. Feelings are sur-
          prisingly refractory to willpower: if wanting to feel different—and talking
          ourselves into feeling different—were possible, there would be many fewer
          psychologists in the world.
               If you serve as your own trading coach, a great place to start is
          with the perspective that feelings contain information. Research in cog-
          nitive neuroscience finds that emotion is an essential component of ratio-
          nal decision-making. When the brain is damaged and becomes unable to
          engage in emotional processing, the result is profoundly distorted behav-
          ior. Your coaching goal is not to banish the feelings associated with dif-
          ficult trading—a strategy that only prevents resolution—or to blindly act
          upon them. Rather, the most constructive step you can take to change a
          feeling is to give it full acknowledgment and extract its vital information.


              Feelings inform us about our appraisals of self, others, and world.


               The research of James Pennebaker, a professor at the University of
          Texas, is quite relevant here. He and his colleagues found that writing
          in a journal or talking aloud for a half hour a day had a powerful effect
          on enabling people to cope effectively with challenging emotional circum-
          stances, including traumas and crises. When we make implicit feelings ex-
          plicit, we view them from different angles and place them into a different
          context. For example, someone who has been angry and frustrated with
          himself over poor trading performance might journal about these thoughts
          and feelings at length. As he is writing—and reading over his writings—he
          suddenly realizes, “Whoa; I’m being awfully hard on myself. I’m not that
          bad!” With that, he is able to throttle back his negative self-talk and turn
          his attention back to markets.
               When we fail to acknowledge emotions, we lose their information and
          thus the opportunity to shift perspectives. The frustrated, angry trader who
          brushes aside his tensions and forges blindly ahead finds them easily trig-
          gered the next day. This is particularly the case when the frustrations are
          triggered initially by trading mistakes. I recently met with a trader who
          fought a market trend all morning, built frustration through the day, and
          then blew up in the late afternoon. Had the trader used the frustration to
          examine his trading, he could have ridden the trend and made significant
          money. Brushing emotions aside doesn’t change them. Ironically, acknowl-
          edging and accepting them, giving them free expression, sets the stage for
          transformation.
               Does that mean that we should give full vent to whatever we’re experi-
          encing? No, psychological research also suggests that unbridled expression

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          16                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          of emotion interferes with concentration and performance. Simply yelling
          when we’re angry or pouting when we’re discouraged does nothing to al-
          ter the feelings—and certainly does not place us closer to resolving the
          situations responsible for the upset in the first place. The trader from my
          example, for instance, spent much of his afternoon fuming, but never re-
          solving his anger. Reflexive acting on such emotions only reinforces them;
          you can’t overcome frustration by behaving in frustrated ways.


               Blindly venting or acting on emotion is as unproductive as blinding
               ourselves to emotion; both prevent learning from the information
               in our feelings.

               The idea, then, is to transform feeling, not ignore it and not revel in
          it. One way to do this is to replace one emotional state with another: to
          substitute feeling for feeling, not thought for feeling.
               In my Psychology of Trading book, I explained how I used the
          early music of Philip Glass to enter a meditative state and trance-form
          experience. Actually any stimulus that evokes calm, focused attention
          can be effective as a tool for shifting emotions. The key is to evoke and
          sustain the Yoda state—the calm focus—during periods of high frustration
          or discouragement. Biofeedback can be especially useful in this regard,
          as computer-based applications provide real-time feedback about your
          success in sustaining the altered state. It is virtually impossible to sustain
          a worked-up state—anger, anxiety, and stress—when keeping yourself
          calm and focused. Even better, in the relaxed state, you’ll arrive at per-
          spectives and insights that remain unavailable while you’re immersed in
          the flight-or-fight mode.
               One exercise I recommend to traders is to draw two thermometers side
          by side on a sheet of paper and then run off a number of copies of the pa-
          per. One thermometer records your emotional temperature with respect to
          frustration; the other records your temperature with respect to confidence.
          The sheet stays by your trade station; all you need to do is make a mark on
          each thermometer to indicate how frustrated and confident you’re feeling
          at the time.
               When we’re most frustrated, but also most overconfident, we’re likely
          to make our worst decisions and violate our trading principles. If you re-
          quire yourself to “take your emotional temperature” during each trading
          session, you create a mechanism for catching your state of mind before it
          can disrupt trading performance.
               Once you identify an elevated frustration temperature, a valuable, au-
          tomatic rule is to take a few minutes away from the screen and enter into a
          trance-formation. This can be done by regulating your breathing—making

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      17

          it particularly deep and slow—and fixing your attention on something that
          captures your attention: music, imagery, or a picture in front of you. If you
          slow your body and take your attention away from the situations that may
          be elevating your emotional temperature, you shift your state and make it
          easier to act calmly, in a planned fashion. With practice, this can be accom-
          plished in a matter of minutes, short-circuiting many disruptive patterns
          before they lead to poor trading decisions.
               The key is to keep yourself aware of your emotional state throughout
          the day. The thermometers are an easy, visually arresting way of becoming
          your own observer—and coach.

                     COACHING CUE

          Check out the insights about breathing in Chapter 9. Mike Bellaﬁore of SMB
          Capital explains how he and partner Steve Spencer teach the traders at their
          prop ﬁrm how to breathe as part of training them to trade. As practitioners of
          meditative disciplines understand, emotional self-control begins with physical
          control.




          LESSON 6: FIND THE RIGHT MIRRORS

          A mirror is an object that shows us our own image. Thanks to mirrors,
          we know what we look like. Far more goes into our self-image, however,
          than our physical reflection. That is because virtually all of our experience
          serves as a psychological mirror. We see ourselves reflected in the impacts
          we have upon the world around us. As a result, much of self-esteem—our
          sense of worth and competence—follows from finding the right mirrors
          in life.
               Let’s start with romantic relationships. When we select the right part-
          ner, we choose someone who knows and values the person we are. That
          love and support is ongoing; consistently reflected to us, it is a deep
          affirmation of self. In a similar fashion, parents constantly mirror a child’s
          identity: “You’re such a good boy!” and “What a smart girl!” Our self-talk is
          born of just such early life conversations: we internalize the voices from
          significant relationships.
               This is why abusive relationships are so damaging. To share life with
          a spouse who attacks or demeans us—or who just doesn’t care—or to en-
          dure parents who are neglectful is to continually face a distorting mirror.
          Over time, children absorb the distorted images and no longer feel lovable,
          secure, and important. Out of such twisted self-images, they select future
          partners that validate their identities, sadly finding others who repeat the

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          18                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          messages and experiences of the past. That is how abused children find
          themselves in abusive relationships; how insecure people land in insecure
          marriages.
              While relationships may be our most powerful psychological mirrors,
          given their emotional intensity and ongoing influence, they are far from the
          only determinants of self-image. The Devon Principle that I wrote about in
          the TraderFeed blog captures the understanding that everything we do is
          a psychological mirror. When my daughter Devon tackled work that she
          didn’t like, she found the work frustrating and felt inadequate as a result.
          When she pursued work that she loved so much that it didn’t feel like work,
          she felt fulfilled and gained confidence. The best work speaks to our in-
          terests and values, matching our abilities with challenges. Day after day,
          performing efficaciously at work that is important to us generates mirror-
          experiences of competence and worth. Conversely, when we’re performing
          meaningless work that doesn’t challenge our skills, it is difficult to feel any-
          thing other than boredom and meaninglessness. A large portion of career
          success consists of finding the right mirrors; it’s much easier to get to the
          top when you’re climbing the right ladders.


               For more on the Devon Principle, check out my blog: http://
               traderfeed.blogspot.com/2006/12/devon-principle.html

               For my work as a psychologist, nothing is a more powerful mirror than
          having a meaningful, positive impact upon people’s lives, particularly when
          I get to know those people well and care about them. I enjoy giving a talk
          for a large audience or writing an article that’s widely read, but the real
          joy is hearing back from someone who thought the ideas were of genuine
          value. And, to be honest, I find far more reward in helping a single person
          in counseling or coaching than in giving a keynote address for a large con-
          ference. When a person transforms her life via coaching or counseling, a
          mirror is created that validates and enhances both participants in the help-
          ing relationship. I have been most successful when I’ve immersed myself in
          these positive mirroring experiences, least successful when I have pursued
          activities that, ultimately, offer a limited sense of self.
               When you serve as your own coach, your challenge is to structure your
          learning and development so that trading itself becomes an experience that
          mirrors your growing confidence and competence. Many traders limit their
          self-coaching to keeping a journal, and then limit their journaling to re-
          counting all the things they’ve done wrong. As a result, self-coaching be-
          comes little more than self-criticism. What is mirrored to a trader when the
          journal focus is so negative? What would be mirrored if we hired a teacher
          or coach who only offered criticism? Over time, such coaching would fail,
          reinforcing a sense of incompetence and failure.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      19


              One of the best means for creating positive mirrors is the structured
          pursuit of goals. When we create challenging, meaningful, and doable
          goals, we generate potential experiences of mastery and success. When we
          make goal setting an ongoing feature of our self-coaching means, we con-
          tinually construct opportunities for powerful, self-affirming emotional
          experiences. We know from psychological research that such emotional
          episodes are processed more deeply and enduringly than normal, daily ex-
          perience. A good therapist creates vivid experiences that challenge clients’
          old patterns; similarly, a good coach generates emotionally powerful and
          positive mirroring experiences for traders.


              Your goals should set yourself up for success and a building of
              confidence.

               So here is your assignment: Each day this week your trading
          journal should include a specific goal for work that particular trading
          session, concrete actions that you will take to achieve that goal, and a self-
          evaluation at the end of trading to gauge your success in reaching that goal.
          The goal should be a trading process that you wish to improve (i.e., some-
          thing you have control over), not a profit target (which you ultimately
          don’t control). For example, your goal might be to increase your trading
          size incrementally, to implement a strategy for exiting trades in stages, or
          to limit trades to setups that align with the larger market trend. At the end
          of the day, you will give yourself a report card based solely on how well you
          achieved the goals you set for the day. These report cards can be displayed
          beside your monitor to reinforce your performance and progress. If you
          fail to achieve a good grade, improvement on that activity becomes your
          goal for the next day. If you receive a fine report card, you generate fresh
          goals for the next session. The idea is to never trade without consciously
          working on some aspect of your trading.


              It is not enough to set goals; you need ways of tracking your
              progress toward those goals and feeding that information into fu-
              ture goals.


               Many traders only engage in such goal setting when they’re trad-
          ing poorly or losing money. The idea, however, is to make self-coaching
          and self-improvement an ongoing part of your trading career. Why? Be-
          cause it’s not just about making money, it’s about creating the experiences
          that will sustain your sense of competence and confidence. Think of a
          young child: you don’t offer positive feedback only when the child is hurt-
          ing. Rather, your support and love are continuous, enabling the child to

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          20                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          sustain a consistent self-image. As a developing trader, you are like that
          young child. Your ability to create powerful mirroring experiences will
          make a difference in your ability to sustain the optimism and courage to
          weather drawdowns and aggressively pursue opportunity.
               Please take note of the following principle: If you limit your losses,
          pursue your strengths, and take concrete steps toward mastery, every sin-
          gle trading day can be a positive experience, even when you’re not making
          money. You cannot eliminate losing days, but there should never be days
          that leave you feeling like a loser.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you construct your report cards, grade yourself based on your improve-
          ment, not based on an abstract (or perfectionist) standard of success. If you
          manage your trades better today than yesterday, that merits a good grade. Your
          goal is to improve; by focusing on improvement, you create powerful mirrors
          of self-development. Relative, not absolute, goals will get you to your desired
          endpoint, and they will ensure an enjoyable and empowering journey.



          LESSON 7: CHANGE OUR FOCUS

          A valuable psychological rule is that if you wish to change the doing, you
          must change the viewing. How we see the world colors how we respond
          to life events. We don’t just react to markets, but also to how we process
          those markets. Our thoughts are the filters between trading and trader.
               Many times we respond in exaggerated ways to markets, not because
          there’s anything unusual going on in the instruments we’re trading, but be-
          cause a set of negative thoughts have intruded into our performance. Let’s
          say, for instance, that I notice that the ES futures are unable to surmount
          their overnight highs during the opening minutes of trade despite a few
          flurries of buying. I then observe that large traders are coming into the mar-
          ket hitting bids. I hypothesize that we cannot sustain strength and that the
          overnight highs will not be breached. I further infer that we will trade back
          into yesterday’s price range and hit the average trading price from that ses-
          sion. I wait for a bounce higher in the NYSE TICK that cannot make a fresh
          price high and use the occasion to sell the futures. As the position moves
          my way, however, the thought enters my mind that I should take quick
          profits because I’ve had a losing week thus far. A buy program then hits
          the market and my position ticks higher, eroding some paper profit. Now
          especially concerned, I take a small profit—only to see the market weaken
          notably and eventually hit my initial price target.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                     21

              What has happened in this scenario? Anxiety has interfered with my
          performance, turning a good trading plan into bad trading. But the anxiety
          has nothing to do with the behavior of the market: the market did abso-
          lutely nothing to disconfirm my idea. Indeed, when the buy program lifted
          the index futures briefly, the market was giving me a perfect opportunity
          to add a second unit to my trade! Not only did I miss an opportunity to
          profit from a good idea, I also missed an opportunity to hit a home run.
          Often, keeping losing trades small and hitting those few home runs gener-
          ates profitability over the long run.


              Many traders’ problems show up in how they handle opportunity,
              not loss.

               Sometimes anxiety is a legitimate and appropriate response to a mar-
          ket that behaves in violent and unexpected ways. After all, as I note in
          the blog, anxiety is our body’s adaptive response to perceived danger. But
          danger can be a function of perception, not objective reality. I begin my
          trade immersed in market activity, framing hypotheses and executing an
          idea well. At some point, however, my thoughts veer from the present
          market and instead focus on how much money I’ve lost during the week
          thus far. That focus on loss creates a sense of danger and threat. Instead
          of responding to the market, I’m now reacting to my own concerns re-
          garding profitability. My thought process has taken me out of the market
          immersion—and ultimately takes me out of my game.
               In a cool, calm moment, I can see clearly that the validity of my trade
          idea/plan has absolutely nothing to do with how I’ve traded the past several
          days. If I introduce worries over profitability into my trading, however,
          I’ve now allowed the viewing to affect the doing. I’m no longer absorbed in
          the market; my focus is gone. I’m responding to my own uncertainties and
          insecurities.
               How can we change our focus and stay grounded in our plans and in
          objective market activity? The first step is to recognize our triggers. These
          are the performance thoughts and worries that typically intrude during
          trading. Concerns over profitability are one trigger; excitement over antici-
          pated profits could be another. Anything that gets you thinking about how
          well or poorly you’re doing while you’re doing it is a trigger that can nudge
          you out of your zone. When you know your triggers, you’re in a much better
          position to intercept them when they occur and treat them the same way
          you would treat any ordinary distraction, such as road noise outside your
          window.
               In other words, it’s not the thoughts of performance that take you
          away from your focus, but your identification with those thoughts. This

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          22                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          is an important distinction. Everyone experiences distracting thoughts at
          times. When we identify with those thoughts, however, they—not our
          markets, not our plans—become our focus.

               Negative thoughts are inevitable; the question is whether you buy
               into them.

               Meditation can be a very helpful exercise. One purpose of medita-
          tion is to help people create a quiet mind by sustaining a single point
          of concentration and brushing aside all distracting internal dialogue and
          impulse. A simple adaptation of meditation for you to try is to take
          15 minutes before the start of trading and seat yourself in a comfortable po-
          sition, breathing slowly and rhythmically from the diaphragm. While in that
          position, focus your attention on quiet instrumental music played through
          headphones. You want to be as absorbed as possible in the music: as soon
          as your mind wanders, bring it back to the music and the sounds of the
          different instruments.
               Once you’ve been able to sustain that focus for a few minutes, you then
          purposely bring to mind your greatest performance concerns—while you
          stay seated, focused, and breathing rhythmically and deeply. You evoke
          one concern at a time (for example, thoughts or fears about your recent
          profitability) and then dismiss the thoughts and bring yourself back to the
          music. Instead of having the thoughts intrude on you unexpectedly, you in-
          tentionally call them to mind and practice and then put them away, as you
          stay calm and focused. You might even guide yourself through imagery as
          you’re breathing deeply and slowly, imagining your negative thoughts as
          trash that you decide to put in a garbage pail. Instead of avoiding your neg-
          ative thoughts, bring them to mind as your own, inner trash-talking—and
          then visualize yourself taking out the garbage.
               Do this every day for a few minutes and you can train yourself to gain
          control over negative thought patterns. Most importantly, you develop the
          capacity to become an observer to those thoughts, rather than to identify


                     COACHING CUE

          Whenever you catch yourself thinking about your P/L during trading—how much
          you’re making or losing—call a brief time-out; take a few deep, rhythmical
          breaths and talk out what you’re seeing in the markets at the time. Your goal
          is to be market-focused, not self-focused. By repeatedly pairing a calm, relaxed
          state with an intense market focus, you can develop a positive habit pattern and
          ensure that the body keeps the mind in check.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      23

          with them. If you can observe something about yourself, you immediately
          introduce an element of psychological distance. Even the most negative
          thoughts and feelings cannot trigger unwanted behaviors if you don’t iden-
          tify with them. Daily meditation is a powerful strategy for building your
          own Internal Observer and sustaining a change process.


          LESSON 8: CREATE SCRIPTS
          FOR LIFE CHANGE

          There is a bit of a chicken-and-egg challenge associated with making
          changes in our lives. To change a behavior pattern, you have to be able
          to exit that pattern. If, however, you had the ability to avoid enacting those
          patterns, you wouldn’t need to change in the first place.
               This dilemma is a common barrier for traders who would like to be
          their own trading coaches, but don’t know how to stand apart from the
          problem patterns that they repeat week after week, month after month.
               To appreciate how we can shift ourselves out of old, problem pat-
          terns and into new, positive ones, we need to understand something about
          drama. Specifically, it’s helpful to start thinking about life in terms of
          the different roles that we enact during our life’s performances. “All the
          world’s a stage,” Shakespeare observed, and we are the sum of the roles
          that we play on that stage.
               Some of our life roles have an automatic, scripted quality to them. Typ-
          ically we learned these roles early in life and, for years, they may have
          worked well for us. As a result, these roles have become overlearned. For
          instance, we may have learned to gain attention from parents by complain-
          ing or by acting up and breaking rules. Over time, those behaviors can
          crystallize into fixed roles: we automatically find ourselves whining or act-
          ing out of frustration during times of personal conflict. What worked in
          childhood by bringing us attention now works against us, interfering with
          careers and romantic relationships.
               Many trading problems have just such a scripted quality: We enact
          the same patterns repeatedly. We start by trading carefully and conscien-
          tiously. Then we lose money and become frustrated. Out of frustration we
          break trading rules, ignore stop-loss points, and undergo serious losses.
          Then we feel tremendous relief at exiting the losing positions and redouble
          our determination to trade carefully and conscientiously—until the next
          frustration comes around. Is this really so different from couples that are
          determined to get along with each other, then encounter frustrations, ar-
          gue and fight to the point of being ready to break up, only to experience
          relief as they make up and vow ever stronger to stop hurting each other?
          Or the person who swears that he will stop gambling, only to make a few

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008    12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          24                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          exceptions, lose money, and then out of relief step away from the casino
          once again, insisting that he won’t go back?


               Trading requires a mind free to process data and select appropriate
               action. But we no longer have a free will if we are mechanically
               reliving scripts from the past.


               A dramaturgic perspective suggests that these repetitive patterns are
          enactments—cyclical reenactments—of roles that we have learned in the
          course of life: the role of the down-and-out person who presses for success,
          the role of the aggrieved spouse, the role of the independent person who
          refuses to be bound by rules, and so forth. One trader I worked with grew
          up in an overprotective and controlling home. He rebelled as a teenager
          and subsequently found himself chafing at any constraints on his behavior.
          His violation of rules in relationships (monogamy) and trading (the risk-
          management rules of the firm) led to one failure after another. He was living
          out a script that could only provide unhappy endings.
               But if we can acquire scripts through our relationship experiences,
          then surely we can cultivate new ones by placing ourselves in different
          roles. One trader I worked with experienced himself as sloppy and undisci-
          plined. It showed not only in his trading, but also in his physical condition
          and the state of his apartment. His breakthrough occurred when he joined
          a fitness club and engaged a personal trainer. The regular series of classes
          and exercise sessions got him into shape and imposed a structure on his
          efforts at self-improvement. As he experienced more energy—and felt bet-
          ter about himself for getting in shape—he spontaneously took the initiative
          in cleaning his apartment and honing his trading rules. The sessions with a
          trainer provided him with a new script and positive experiences that mir-
          rored a fresh identity. By enacting a new role, he experienced himself in
          a new manner—and this infiltrated a variety of areas of his life.
               Here’s another example: For years I tended to be impatient—with my-
          self, with others, with trading, and even with the pace of change among
          people I met in therapy. When Margie and I had two children, however, I
          found myself in a new role that did not allow me to be impatient if I were
          going to be a good parent. Because it was clear that both our children had
          personalities very different from mine, I had to figure out ways to commu-
          nicate with them on their terms. The new role as a patient parent provided
          me with a discrepant set of experiences; I subsequently found myself more
          patient in a variety of situations, whether it was behind the wheel of a car
          or during counseling work with a client who felt stuck. The new role gen-
          erated novel, positive scripts. With the favorable mirroring over years of
          parenting, I’ve actually changed how I see myself. I now experience myself

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                        25

          as a relatively calm, patient person: it has become an integral part of my
          identity.


              For more on how new experiences generate new roles and scripts,
              check out my blog: http://traderfeed.blogspot.com/2006/11/cross-
              cultural-journey.html.


               So here’s your challenge and your assignment: Identify the person you
          would like to be and then throw yourself into a structured social activity—a
          role—that requires you to enact those ideals. If you want to be more disci-
          plined, take on a discipline: martial arts, work with a personal trainer, etc.
          If you want to be more patient and focused, undergo meditation training
          or work with young children that you care about; if you want to become
          more socially confident, immerse yourself in public speaking; if you want
          to trade more aggressively, join a trading room that mirrors the style you
          want to adopt and actively participate in its discussions. Create the roles
          that mirror your desired identity; live scripts of your choosing. If you can
          place yourself in situations where you routinely practice being the person
          you want to be, you’ll rapidly make that person your own. Change begins
          with novel experience, but is sustained through repetition.


                     COACHING CUE

          To be the trader you want to be, consider taking on a student/trainee. When
          someone is observing you and learning from you, you’ll be on your best be-
          havior. With the teaching script, you’ll access behavior patterns that you would
          never enact in isolation. Alternatively, take on a peer mentorship role. The so-
          cial motivation to live up to your best for your trading buddies will enable you
          to access your best behavior patterns.




          LESSON 9: HOW TO BUILD
          YOUR SELF-CONFIDENCE

          Trading is one of the most challenging occupations, because traders rou-
          tinely face working conditions that they cannot control. Psychological
          research suggests that one important basis for self-confidence is self-
          efficacy: the perception that we can control outcomes that are important to
          us. But how can we sustain self-confidence as traders if we cannot control
          whether we make money from day to day?

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          26                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               A trader recently called and expressed frustration with his perfor-
          mance. Markets were moving well and, for the most part, he was catch-
          ing the direction correctly. He entered positions aggressively, but then was
          stopped out at the worst times when the market made sharp, short coun-
          tertrend moves. When we reviewed his trading statistics, we found that his
          average win size exceeded his average loser, but that he had many more
          losing trades than winners. The steady drumbeat of losing trades was erod-
          ing his self-confidence.
               So what was the problem?
               Our trader was waiting for markets to begin moving in the anticipated
          direction and then entering with full size. By the time he lifted an offer or
          hit a bid, the market had already made a short-term move and was ripe
          for profit taking by scalpers. His full size made these countertrend moves
          intolerable, and his risk management rules ensured that he had no stay-
          ing power with his ideas. The market was controlling him; he was not in
          control of his trading. The loss of self-confidence was inevitable.
               The key to regaining self-confidence in such a situation is to turn
          the focus from making (or losing) money to the actual process of trad-
          ing. We initiated a simple unit-sizing rule in which the trader could only
          enter positions with one unit (his maximum size was three units). If the
          position went his way, but then experienced a normal retracement, he
          added a second unit. If the position did not go his way, he maintained a
          defined stop-loss point and ensured a minimal loss, given that his size was
          one-third his maximum. The trader could not control the market’s move-
          ment, but he could control his position sizing. This process focus promoted
          a sense of self-efficacy, which was essential to recapturing his confidence.


               You control how you trade; the market controls how and when
               you’ll get paid.


               This is one reason that trading with rules is so important. You can’t
          control your P/L statement, but you can control whether you adhere to
          trading rules. Your focus becomes one of trading well, not one of making
          money. Every rule followed—every market traded well—is a success ex-
          perience in the process sense. Over time, profits result (as long as the rules
          are sound!), but the confidence comes from self-mastery.
               Another powerful source of self-efficacy is preparation. When you pre-
          pare your trading ideas for the day or week, you generate a sense of mental
          mastery. This is particularly the case when your preparation includes what-
          if scenarios that guide your decision-making under a variety of market pos-
          sibilities. Successful experience is a powerful source of mastery, and the
          mental rehearsal of trading plans under various contingencies generates

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                       27

          a form of experience. As a psychologist, I am impressed by the degree to
          which traders who prepare rigorously feel as though they deserve to win.
          That same sense is missing among those who casually scan newspapers,
          charts, or web sites and then plunk themselves down at the trade station
          to place their orders.
               Many traders confuse self-confidence and positive thinking. Self-
          confidence is not expecting the best; it’s knowing, deep inside, that you
          can handle the worst. The self-confident trader can look a stop-loss level
          in the eye and know that he will be okay if it is triggered. The self-confident
          trader knows that loss is part of the game—and that some of our best
          market information comes from good trade ideas that don’t work out.
          Self-confidence is not cockiness, nor is it viewing the world through rose-
          colored glasses. It’s the quiet sense of, “I’ve been here; I can handle this.”


              Confidence doesn’t come from being right all the time; it comes
              from surviving the many occasions of being wrong.


               Nothing is so important in building self-confidence as successful
          experience in the face of adversity. When you serve as your own trading
          coach, a major task you face is generating your own positive trading ex-
          perience. Just this morning I read an e-mail from a trader who had experi-
          enced harrowing losses in the markets over the past two years. Now he was
          having difficulty sustaining the optimism needed to weather normal losses.
          His failure was not as a trader, but as his own trading coach. When we trau-
          matize ourselves, we generate negative experience. We create a sense of
          helplessness, rather than mastery. We create deep emotional connections
          between trading and loss, rather than between trading and self-efficacy. We
          undercut self-confidence.
               A great way to build self-confidence is to focus on how you trade when
          you’re in the hole. If confidence comes from successfully navigating ad-
          versity, you can build your confidence by working on how you trade when
          trades go against you. The idea is to focus on trading well by giving yourself
          a chance to dig out of the hole by not exiting a losing trade prematurely, but
          also to not allow the losing trade to move so far against you that it creates
          trauma. Every planned loss that you take provides you with an experience
          of control; every drawdown that you battle back from is an experience of
          mastery. When you come back from losses, you reinforce your emotional
          resilience. You can’t control whether you win or lose on a particular trade,
          but you can control how much you lose and how you lose it.
               Every trader needs a plan for losing. Your stop-loss is your plan for
          a losing trade. Cut your size after a series of losing days and focus your

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          28                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          efforts on your highest probability trades as your plan for a drawdown pe-
          riod. In Ranger school, the Army exposes recruits to the most harrowing
          physical conditions possible. Once recruits have completed their training,
          they have the deep conviction that they can handle any and all battle con-
          ditions. You want to view your losing trades and your losing periods in
          markets as your Ranger School, your trial by fire.


               Your losing trades and losing periods are your trials by fire that
               build resilience and confidence.


               How will you handle a significant losing trade? How will you handle
          a significant losing day? Week? Month? How will you ensure that you can
          draw upon your strengths and come back from these losses and build your
          resilience? Your assignment is to develop your plans for losing, to always
          know—and mentally rehearse—what will get you out of trades and out of
          markets, so that you can retool your efforts.
               In psychology, crisis does offer opportunity: it shakes up our assump-
          tions and forces us to make changes in how we think and act. Your chal-
          lenge as your own coach is to find the opportunity in your crises by gener-
          ating and rehearsing plans for anything and everything that can go wrong.
          To prepare for hurricanes and tornadoes, communities not only draw up
          disaster plans, but also conduct drills to put these into practice. Change is
          a function of preparation and training: drilling the right responses, so that
          they are second nature when market disaster looms.


                     COACHING CUE

          Just before I wrote this section of the book, a savvy trader contacted me and
          explained that he broke some of his rules and lost the proﬁts from the prior
          week. He was very upset and wrote a memo to himself to ensure that he learned
          from the experience. He sent the memo to me and insisted that we talk in a
          few days to ensure that he followed up on the memo. It’s a great example of
          how a trader takes a losing situation and turns it into an opportunity for self-
          improvement. He won’t let the issue go until he’s rectiﬁed his errors.
               That’s how traders turn losing experiences into conﬁdence builders. Next
          time you blow up in your trading, write yourself a detailed memo that explains
          what went wrong, why it went wrong, and what you will do to avoid the problem
          going forward. Then send the memo to a valued trading buddy for follow up to
          hold yourself accountable. That way, every big mistake becomes a catalyst for
          meaningful change.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                      29


          LESSON 10: FIVE BEST PRACTICES FOR
          EFFECTING AND SUSTAINING CHANGE

          The first two years of my career as a psychologist, I worked in a community
          mental health center, helping individuals, couples, and families with the full
          array of emotional disorders, from depression to drug abuse. The follow-
          ing year I shifted my practice to student counseling at Cornell University,
          which afforded my first opportunity to work with a relatively healthy pop-
          ulation dealing with normal, developmental issues. I then took the commu-
          nity and student experiences to Upstate Medical University in Syracuse,
          New York, where I coordinated the counseling and therapy for medical,
          nursing, and other health sciences students and professionals for 19 years.
          It was in this latter setting that I learned to apply brief therapy methods to
          the challenges of young people who were in high-stress, high-achievement
          occupations. That experience would prove invaluable to my work with
          traders in the financial markets.
               During my time in Syracuse, I met on average about 150 students a year
          for about eight sessions each. Multiply that times 19 and you have a sense
          for the changes I’ve seen happen and not happen. The shining successes,
          the disappointing failures: all stand out in my mind as if they occurred
          last week.
               When you’ve worked with that many people over the course of a ca-
          reer, you develop a good sense for change processes and what makes them
          click or stall. It doesn’t matter if you’re working with a victim of abuse in
          the community, a student with test anxiety at an Ivy League school, or a
          medical student dealing with the first loss of a patient. Change has a par-
          ticular structure and sequence; there are factors that speed it up and those
          that impede it. Below I share five of the most important change elements
          that affect my work as a trading coach. When you harness those elements,
          you will be well positioned to succeed in your self-coaching:

           1. Timing and Readiness. Timing is everything, in psychology as in trad-
              ing. The research of Prochaska and DiClemente suggests that people
              are most likely to make changes when they’re ready to make changes.
              Many times we’re conflicted about change; we’re not really sure that
              we want to abandon old ways. I talked with a trader recently who
              lost much more money than he should have (and than his plan called
              for) because he simultaneously traded three positions with full size
              when those positions were highly correlated. He was wrong and he
              blew out. But when we reviewed the unit sizing by trade idea rather
              than simply by position, it was clear that he wasn’t sure he wanted
              to make smaller bets. He was upset because he was wrong on the

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          30                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              idea, not because he had violated risk-management discipline. My job
              was then to help him become more ready for the change he needed
              to make, just as an alcohol counselor must help an alcoholic become
              more ready to commit to sobriety. You will change when you’re ready
              to change, and you’ll be ready to change when you recognize that you
              need to change. As we saw earlier, by becoming more emotionally con-
              nected to the consequences of our behavior, we cultivate that need to
              change.
           2. Ready, Steady, Go. One of the traps that eager traders fall into when
              they start coaching is that they want to make many changes all at once.
              As a result, traders overload themselves with too many goals, water
              down their focus, and never adequately follow through with any of
              them. If you have a list of five changes to make, select the one that
              you’re most ready to make (as noted above): the one that you’re most
              committed to taking action on. Work on that one goal intensively and
              daily until you make and sustain significant progress; then move to
              the next change. The momentum from your success with the first effort
              will carry over and help your work with the others. If you begin with a
              goal that you should work on, but aren’t fully committed to, you’ll stall
              out on your entire coaching effort. Keep your work doable, but keep
              it steady. Build momentum and success, and that will help with your
              later change efforts


               When you coach yourself, focus your efforts and let one success
               fuel others.


           3. Double Down. When you first make a desired change, don’t let up.
               Rather, focus on what you did to make that change and redouble your
               efforts. Make your goal to sustain that change. All too often, traders
               let up once they make an initial improvement. That’s like hurting your
               opponent in a boxing ring and then not moving in to finish him off.
               You want progress to double your motivation, not let your bad habits
               off the hook. We’ve seen that the enemy of change is relapse: all of
               us too easily fall back into old patterns if we’re not making conscious
               and sustained efforts to build new ones. The key to change is relapse
               prevention: repeating new patterns so often that they become natural
               to us. Any change worthy of pursuit is worth repeating 30 times in 30
               days. In Alcoholics Anonymous, a committed new member will attend
               90 meetings in 90 days; “bring the body in and the mind will follow”
               is the slogan. Make the change consistently enough and it will be your
               change.

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      12:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Change                                                                       31



              Successful coaching means working as hard at maintaining
              changes as initiating them.


           4. Stay Active. The research literature in psychology finds that change
              is most likely to occur when we are active in its pursuit. That is, we
              change by enacting new patterns—by doing new things—not simply
              by talking about change or thinking about it. I often joke that traders
              approach coaching like many people treat church: they go once a week
              to feel virtuous and forget about it for the next six days. A truly re-
              ligious person wants to live their beliefs every day; if you’re going to
              get the religion of virtuous trading, it’s no different. That is why each
              goal should be accompanied by specific daily activities that help you
              make progress. If your goal is better risk management, then you want
              to work on managing the risk of every trade. If your goal is a better
              mindset, then you want to perform specific exercises each day to keep
              calm and focused. You won’t change your behavior by changing your
              mind; you’ll start thinking differently once you enact new behavior
              patterns.
           5. Stay Positive. “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,” is the philosophy of those
              who fail to work on trading until they’re broke. If you’re trading well,
              that’s one of the best times to coach yourself . Your goal isn’t to change
              what’s working; it’s to become even more consistent in your efforts.
              Doing more of what works is a valuable goal that helps you press your
              advantage when you’re doing well. The alternative, sitting back on your
              laurels when you’re making money, will bring comfort, but not elite
              levels of success. I recently met with a prop trader who was trading
              very well on relatively small size. A quick look at his Sharpe Ratio and
              trading results suggested that he could be making much more money
              simply by running more risk in his portfolio and sticking to his bread-
              and-butter setups and markets. We developed a plan for doing that and
              he turned good success into outstanding success. By formulating pos-
              itive goals—focusing on changes that involve doing more of the right
              things—he made the most of his strengths. It’s for that reason that I
              often tell people that the best time for coaching is when you’re doing
              really well and really poorly.

               The best traders, I find, are those who have made self-improvement
          a way of life. Such traders are driven in their work lives, their physical
          fitness, and their recreations. They derive great meaning and satisfaction
          from being the best they can be. The same is true of great athletes: they
          love working out; they constantly challenge themselves. It’s when change is

P1: JYS
c01     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       12:55     Printer: Yet to come




          32                                                       THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          a lifestyle that we see exemplary performance. At that point, self-coaching
          becomes a life philosophy—an organizing principle—not just a discrete ac-
          tivity among many during the day or week.


                      COACHING CUE

          What is the one change you most want to make outside of trading? Develop a
          daily plan for action on the goal that will help your trading eﬀorts. It’s all about
          strengthening the coach within you, whether you’re working on your ﬁnances,
          your relationships, your physical conditioning, or your chess game. The goal is
          to become a change agent, a master of change across all spheres of life. Working
          on your nontrading life is a way of building your self-coaching as a trader.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the topic
          of change at the home page on the blog for Chapter 1:
          http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-one-links.html
               Some changes—particularly of problems that have been longstanding
          and that interfere with relationships and/or work in a significant way—may
          require more than self-coaching. Here is a referral list for cognitive thera-
          pists that I’ve found helpful:
          http://www.academyofct.org/Library/CertifiedMembers/Index.asp?Folder
          ID=1137
               For a detailed, research-based summary of the literature on change,
          check out Bergin and Garfield’s Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behav-
          ior Change, published by Wiley and in its fifth edition (2003). Of particu-
          lar relevance are the chapters in Section 2, dealing with “Evaluating the
          Ingredients of Therapeutic Efficacy.”
               For an overview of short-term approaches to change, check out my
          chapter on “Brief Therapy” in the Handbook of Clinical Psychology, Vol-
          ume 1 edited by Michel Hersen and Alan M. Gross, also published by Wiley
          (2008).
               A worthwhile collection of creative approaches to change can be found
          in Clinical Strategies for Becoming a Master Psychotherapist edited by
          William O’Donohue, Nicholas A. Cummings, and Janet L. Cummings (Aca-
          demic Press, 2006), including my chapter on “The Importance of Novelty
          in Psychotherapy.”

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 2




                                 Stress and
                                  Distress
                           Creative Coping for Traders



                     If you plan on being anything less than you are ca-
                     pable of being, you will probably be unhappy all the
                     days of your life.
                                                      —Abraham Maslow



                    hen traders seek coaching, one of their most frequent requests is

         W          help with reducing stress. The assumption is that less stress is bet-
                    ter and, if they could eliminate stress, trading would go well. But
          is that true?
               In this chapter we’ll take a look at stress and distress, as well as the
          difference between the two. We’ll also explore coping and what makes for
          effective and ineffective responses to stressful situations.
               One of the great challenges of coaching in a high-intensity, competi-
          tive field is making sure that normal, expectable stress doesn’t turn into
          performance-robbing distress. In practice this means distinguishing be-
          tween the stresses that are part and parcel of the trading profession and
          those that we unwittingly place on ourselves.
               Let’s take a look at how you can make stress work for you in your
          self-coaching efforts.



          LESSON 11: UNDERSTANDING STRESS

          It’s common to hear suggestions that traders eliminate or greatly minimize
          psychological stress. This, of course, is impossible. The very act of trading
          requires daily encounters with risk and uncertainty. Psychological stress is

                                                                                      33

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          34                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          assured when we operate in such environments. If minimal stress is your
          objective, trading should not be your vocation or avocation.
               Many traders—and trading coaches—confuse stress and distress. Not
          all psychological stress brings distress, and not all psychological stress
          is bad. If you are going to coach yourself for trading success, it’s impor-
          tant that you understand stress: how it helps performance, and how it can
          become distress and interfere with decision-making.
               So let’s start with an everyday example. You’re driving on a highway on
          a long trip, and you’re feeling a bit bored. Suddenly the wind picks up and
          snowfall becomes heavy. Your visibility is greatly reduced, and you can feel
          the road becoming slippery. Before you know it, you’re hunched over the
          steering wheel, staring intently through the windscreen and reducing your
          speed. Your boredom has quickly turned into alertness. You’re no longer
          operating on auto-pilot.
               This is psychological stress: a heightened physical and cognitive state
          that prepares us for dealing with challenges. It’s been called the flight or
          fight response, because it mobilizes mind and body to avoid challenging
          situations or to face them head on. Muscle tension, alertness, and the flow
          of adrenaline: these are but a few cues that we’ve entered a state of stress.
               Note that this is an adaptive state in the example of driving in the snow-
          storm. Had you remained on autopilot, you might not have slowed your
          speed and taken measures to avoid an accident. The state of stress has
          mobilized your energy—shifted you from your boredom—to cope with the
          immediate situation. You can appreciate how silly it is to talk of minimizing
          stress in such a situation: when you’re in a blinding snowstorm in a moving
          vehicle, your mind and body should mobilize!


               Stress is a mobilization of mind and body; it can facilitate perfor-
               mance.

              But let’s take our example one step farther. I lived in the Syracuse,
          New York, area for more than 20 years, so the snowstorm is challenging,
          but not unfamiliar. I’ve experienced similar conditions before, and I know
          what to do when they arise. My stress never becomes distress, because I
          never perceive the storm as an acute threat.
              Suppose, however, I am from Florida and have never experienced such
          a storm. I’ve heard of cars getting into pileup accidents under those condi-
          tions, and I’m worried that my tires will lose their grip. The storm is highly
          threatening for me; I don’t feel capable of mastering it. My stress quickly
          becomes distress, as alertness turns into anxiety.
              The simple example of the car illustrates that perception and expe-
          rience make the difference between stress and distress. When I was an
          undergraduate at Duke University, David Aderman and I performed an

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          35

          experiment. We had two groups of subjects deliver a speech. Both groups
          received negative feedback about their performance. The first group was
          told that speaking ability was linked to personality and could not be
          changed. The second group was told that they could improve their speak-
          ing skills relatively easily. At the end of the session, the first group reported
          significantly more distress than the second group. It wasn’t getting the
          negative feedback that generated distress; it was the perception that they
          were not competent to change the negative situation.


              Our interpretations of situations turn normal stress into distress.

               So how does this relate to trading? When you put your capital at risk,
          you’re like the driver on the snowy road. You will be alert, processing in-
          formation in real time to make quick mid-course corrections if needed. If
          you view losing as a natural part of trading, have experienced and bounced
          back from losses before, and have mechanisms in place to limit your losses,
          stress is unlikely to become distress. The losing trade is a mere annoyance,
          like having your trip delayed by a snowstorm.
               If, however, you don’t accept losing as normal and natural—and espe-
          cially if you don’t have position size limits and stop-loss levels in place to
          control your losses—the stress of a trade going against you is more apt to
          become distress. Your ability to focus and make those rapid mid-course
          corrections will become impaired. You’ll be like the Florida driver in the
          Northeast snowstorm.
               Position size limits, trading plans, and stop-loss levels are like snow
          tires on your vehicle: they may not seem to do a lot for you when things
          are going well, but they certainly help you deal with adverse conditions.
          A panicky driver in the snow doesn’t feel that he can control his car; an ex-
          perienced winter driver knows that he can. Similarly, the panicked trader
          feels unable to control losses; the experienced trader knows that losses
          can always be limited.
               Your challenge as your own trading coach is to embrace stress—and
          always ensure that it does not become distress. A fantastic goal to work
          on for your trading is to start the day with position sizing guidelines, per-
          trade loss limits, per-trade price targets, and daily loss limits that you can
          readily live with. The amount of risk you’re willing to take on each trade
          should be meaningfully smaller than the reward potential built into your
          profit targets. The amount of money you’re willing to lose each day should
          be a fraction of the money you make on your best days. If you’re a fre-
          quent trader, no single loss on a trade should prevent you from making
          money on the day; no single daily loss should be so large that you can’t be
          profitable on the week. Preparation and familiarity keep stress from be-
          coming distress, because they enhance your sense of control. If you plan

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 28, 2008       9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          36                                                        THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your loss levels and review those plans thoroughly, they become familiar
          and you become prepared. (See the brief questionnaire in Figure 2.1 to as-
          sess whether your stress is turning into distress.)


                If you are prepared for adversity, you will respond with normal
                stress, not distress.


              Trading will always be stressful, but self-coaching ensures that it won’t
          be filled with distress. Remember, your job is to maintain a mindset that
          keeps your confidence and motivation high: under those conditions, you’ll



               Please respond to the following questions with the scale below:

                                  1 = rarely or never
                                  2 = occasionally
                                  3 = sometimes
                                  4 = fairly often
                                  5 = most of the time

           How often do the following interfere with your work and/or your relationships?

                  1) Nervousness or anxiety? —
                  2) A downbeat or depressed mood? —
                  3) Frustration or anger? —
                  4) Guilt or self-blame? —
                  5) Alcohol or other substances? —
                  6) Arguments or fights? —
                  7) Fatigue or exhaustion? —
                  8) Sleep problems? —
                  9) Headaches, stomachaches, muscle tension? —
                 10) Worry, negative thinking? —

           Note: Even a single score of 4 or greater merits attention and possible con-
           sultation with a professional (see Resource page at the end of this chapter),
           particularly if the problem is long-standing (greater than one year in duration).
           Several scores of 3 or greater are also worthy of attention. Chapters 4 through
           6 of this book will outline specific brief therapy techniques that can be useful in
           addressing these problems, particularly when these are situational, not chronic.

          FIGURE 2.1 Brief Distress Questionnaire

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         37


          work harder, learn more, and grow your trading account over time. That
          doesn’t mean repealing stress; it means creating active firewalls between
          stress and distress. Risk management is one of the best psychological fire-
          walls of all.



                     COACHING CUE

          Plan for every possible glitch in your trading: if your broker can’t be reached;
          if you lose your online connection; if your equipment fails; if your data vendor
          goes down. My own trading station is small, but there is redundancy in each
          of these areas. I have multiple brokers, multiple online connections, multiple
          computers, and multiple data streams. There’s always a rehearsed Plan B if
          something fails when I have a position on. The glitches still cause stress, but
          not distress.




          LESSON 12: ANTIDOTES FOR TOXIC
          TRADING ASSUMPTIONS

          What we expect from life shapes our emotional experience. If we expect
          good things, we tend to be optimistic and energetic. If we expect negative
          outcomes, we tend to feel anxiety. If we expect that success will elude
          us, we’ll feel discouraged and depressed. If we expect perfection, we’ll be
          continually disappointed with reality.
              To no small degree, our emotions are barometers of the degree to
          which we are meeting or falling short of our expectations. That is an
          important principle, because psychological research suggests that, if our
          expectations are biased, we’re likely to experience skewed emotions.
              The relationship between emotion and expectation is particularly
          important for the developing trader. If you are your own trading coach,
          one of your overriding priorities is to foster the kind of positive experi-
          ence that will sustain your motivation and learning efforts. Discouraged,
          defeated, and fearful learners are not effective learners. If you are going
          to maintain that zone of focus and concentration that maximizes learning
          efforts, you have to be absorbed in markets. No one can be absorbed if
          they’re also battling emotional distress.
              In the spirit of Ayn Rand, who encouraged people to “check their
          premises” when they arrived at contradictory conclusions (“I should be
          happy” but “I shouldn’t be selfish”), I’ll now ask you to check your
          expectations—particularly if you’re finding that distress is interfering with

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          38                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your learning and development. The following expectations are among the
          most trader-toxic:

           1. A Good Day Is a Winning Day. Here’s an assumption and expecta-
               tion that ensures that our emotional experience will rise and fall with
               our P/L. We generally expect to have a good day; by equating a good
               day with a winning day, we set ourselves up for disappointment when
               the normal uncertainty of markets leaves us in the red. A good day is
               one in which we follow sound trading practices, from skilled execu-
               tion to prudent risk management. Some good days will bring profits,
               others will not. We can trade poorly and stumble into a profit; we can
               place a trade with a two-thirds probability of success and lose money
               as often as an all-star baseball hitter gets a hit. We should expect to
               have good days, if those are defined by sound trading practice. If sound
               practices don’t generate profits over time, we may need to tweak those
               practices. But going into trading expecting profits each day is a formula
               for emotional letdown.


               Never set a goal if you’re not in full control of its attainment.


           2. Working Harder at Trading Means Trading More Often. This as-
              sumption is that, if you trade more, you’ll learn more and build skills
              more quickly. The result is overtrading and a likely forfeiture of prof-
              its over time to market makers and brokers. Every trade starts as a
              loser. You’re losing the bid-offer spread if you buy and sell at the mar-
              ket, and you certainly lose a transaction fee. A loss of a single tick per
              trade due to execution, on top of a substantial retail commission, eas-
              ily ensures losses of thousands of dollars to day traders who otherwise
              break even on their trades. As we trade more often without a distinct
              edge to each trade, our broker becomes richer and we become broker.
              Pointing and clicking to execute trades is a small part of the process
              by which traders develop expertise. The lion’s share of development
              occurs by tracking patterns in simulation and real time, practicing exe-
              cuting and stopping out trades on paper (and in simulation mode) prior
              to risking capital, and researching trading ideas. By expecting trading
              itself to generate learning, we ensure that our motivation for learning
              will lead to overtrading—and a loss of both capital and motivation.
           3. Success Means Making a Living from Trading. Here is another ex-
              pectation guaranteed to generate frustration and discouragement. No
              developing professional makes their living from their performances
              during the early years of expertise building. A golfer or tennis player
              may spend years on a college team and as an amateur before even
              starting the pro circuit. Star actors or actresses typically spend years

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          39

              in lessons and regional theaters before they see their names under
              the Broadway lights. Before surgeons make a living from their trade,
              they spend four years as a medical student, four more years as a sur-
              gical resident, and even more years in subspecialty training. Expect-
              ing to make a sustainable living from trading within the first years of
              exposure to markets is wholly unrealistic. More realistic expectations
              would be to keep losses to a reasonable level, cover one’s costs with
              regularity, and improve trading processes. There is no path to exper-
              tise that doesn’t first require time to develop mere competence. If you
              expect to make a living from trading much more quickly than people
              in other fields are able to sustain a livelihood, you are setting yourself
              up for frustration and failure.
               An excellent antidote to these toxic assumptions is to write out your
          expectations as part of keeping a trading journal. This includes your expec-
          tations for each day of trading—your goals for trading well—but also your
          expectations for your development over time. My goal for my own trad-
          ing performance is relatively modest: I want to earn more than the riskless
          rate of return after trading costs, and I want to do that by risking less than
          that proportion of my capital. In other words, I’m targeting positive risk-
          adjusted returns; that integrates my performance and process goals. I will
          be very happy if I average one percent returns on my portfolio per month
          by risking significantly less than that.

              By focusing on risk-adjusted returns, not just absolute profitability,
              we blend process and outcome goals.

               This may not be a realistic target for you, depending on your level of
          development and your risk appetite as a trader. What is important is not my
          target numbers, but rather the fact that I have developed realistic, attain-
          able objectives for my trading. If I achieve my expectations, I feel a sense
          of pride and accomplishment. If I fall short, I can quickly identify that fact,
          pull back my risk exposure, and make necessary corrections.
               A formula for positive trading development is: Always expect success,
          and always define success so that it is challenging, but attainable. Writing
          out your expectations for the day, week, month, and year—and ensuring
          that they’re doable—is a powerful lever over your emotional experience as
          a trader.

                     COACHING CUE

          A great entry in a daily trading journal: “What would make my trading day a
          success today, even if I don’t make money?” That simple question leads directly
          to process goals—the things you can best control.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          40                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 13: WHAT CAUSES THE
          DISTRESS THAT INTERFERES WITH
          TRADING DECISIONS?

          We become anxious and exit a good trade before it has an opportunity to
          reach its price target. We become frustrated and take a trade that com-
          pletely contradicts our research and planning. We’re afraid of missing a
          trade and enter at the worst possible time. We’re reluctant to take a loss at
          our designated stop point and wind up with a much larger loss.
              All of these are examples of trading behaviors for which all of us as
          traders can truly say, “been there, done that.” In trading, as in much of life,
          we learn by making the mistakes our parents and mentors try to protect
          us from. The key to longevity is making those mistakes early in your
          development, before you have too much on the line. Mistakes in dating can
          lead to a great marriage. Mistakes on a simulator can lead to solid real-time
          performance. Making your errors when your risk is lowest is a large part of
          success.
              But what causes these mistakes, in which the arousal of distress interf-
          eres with prior planning and consistent, sound decision-making? Perhaps if
          we can figure that out, we can shorten the painful learning curve just a bit.


               The fields of behavioral finance and neuroeconomics have illumi-
               nated how emotions affect financial decisions; check out refer-
               ences at the end of this chapter.


               To hear traders talk, distress in trading is caused by markets. A market
          turns slow and range-bound: that is the supposed cause of a trader’s bore-
          dom and overtrading. A market reverses direction: that allegedly generates
          frustration and impulsive trades for the trader. Because their emotions are
          triggered by a market event, traders assume that the market must be re-
          sponsible for their feelings. A moment’s thought, of course, dispels this no-
          tion. After all, if the market had the power to compel emotional reactions,
          we would see all traders respond identically in a similar situation. That,
          however, is not what happens. Not all traders respond to a slow market
          with boredom and overtrading; not all traders become frustrated and make
          impulsive decisions when a position reverses against them. There is more
          to the cause of our emotions than external events.
               In order for a market event to generate a negative emotional re-
          sponse, we have to view it as a threat. Let’s say that I’m a trader watching
          my market become slow and range-bound at midday. If I view that as an
          opportunity to update some of my ideas and prepare for the afternoon,
          the slow market will not trouble me in the least. Similarly, I may view the
          choppy, thin action as an opportunity to get away from the screen, clear

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                        41

          out my head, and start the afternoon fresh. Again, the slow action affects
          neither my feelings nor my trading behavior.
               If, however, I start my day telling myself that I must make at least sev-
          eral thousand dollars each day, then I’ll now perceive the slow market as a
          threat to my trading goal. The narrow, whippy action translates into lack of
          opportunity, which translates into lack of profit, which translates into lack
          of success. It’s easy to see, with that mental framework, how I could wind
          up viewing slow markets as threats to my career. It’s no wonder that the
          slow market would trigger my distress and overtrading.
               But, of course, it’s not merely the slow market that is generating my
          negative mood and behavior; it’s my perception of that market. Perception
          is the filter that we place between events and our responses to events. If
          we place a distorting lens over our eyes, we will see the world in distorted
          ways. If we adopt distorted perceptions of markets and ourselves, we’ll
          experience trading in distorted ways.


              Can we alter our perceptions? Chapter 6 deals with cognitive ap-
              proaches to change that restructure thought processes.


               So how do we change the filters that turn normal trading experience
          into abnormal events?
               The rule is simple: if you don’t know your filters, you cannot change
          them. Becoming aware of the expectations and beliefs that shape your
          perception is essential to the process of shifting your perception.
               Here’s a simple exercise that can aid you in becoming more aware of
          any distorted perceptions you might hold:
               Every time you experience a distinctly negative emotional reaction
          to a market event, consciously ask yourself, “How am I perceiving the
          current market as a threat?” This turns your attention to your percep-
          tual processes, giving you a chance to separate perceived threat from real
          threat.
               A simple example comes from my recent trading. I really wanted to
          finish the week on a high-water note in my equity curve and found myself
          with a nice profit on a Friday morning trade to the long side. As the trade
          moved my way, I moved my stop to breakeven. The trade continued to go
          my way a bit before making a small reversal. It then chopped around for a
          few minutes. I found myself becoming nervous with the trade, as if it were
          on the verge of plunging below my stop point.
               I quickly asked myself, “Why am I nervous with this trade? Why am
          I perceiving the trade with so much uneasiness?” A moment’s reflection
          and review of the market told me that the trade was perfectly fine and
          progressing according to plan. It was my desire to end the week profitably
          (after an extended flat period of performance, I should add) that turned

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          42                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          the potential reversal of a winning trade into a threat. If all the market
          can do after the run-up is chop around in a flat way, perhaps this is an
          opportunity to add to the position, I reasoned. I calibrated my risk/reward
          on the added piece to the position (and for the position overall, given my
          new average purchase price) and added a small portion to the trade. The
          added increment wasn’t large enough to dramatically affect the profitability
          or risk of the trade, but it was an important psychological step: I turned a
          perceived threat into opportunity.
               The key here is to distinguish between actual threats—markets that
          truly are not behaving according to your expectations—from perceived
          threat. That requires reflection about markets and about personal assump-
          tions. Once I saw that the trade was proceeding normally, I was free to
          challenge the filters that were leading me to become nervous with a good
          trade.


               When you think about your thinking by adopting the perspective of
               a self-observer, you no longer buy into negative thought patterns.


              After you identify a perception that turns a normal event into a threat,
          the next challenge is to find opportunity in that normal event. I might feel
          threatened by a difference of opinion with my wife, but that threat can be
          turned into an opportunity for fruitful communication and problem solving.
          We might feel threatened by a trade that starts modestly profitable but then
          stops us out, but that threat can be turned into an opportunity to flip our
          position or reassess our views of that market.
              Identify the perceived threat; turn the perceived threat into an op-
          portunity: that is a two-step process that addresses the true cause of
          emotional reactions that distort trading decisions. By keeping a journal
          specifically devoted to your thinking and perceiving, you can structure this
          two-step process and turn it into a habit pattern that you activate in real
          time.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you talk or IM about the day’s trading, pay attention to how you describe
          the markets: good, bad, quiet, active. Listen especially for the tone of your
          descriptions. Many times, your tone and language will give away whether you’re
          in tune with markets or ﬁghting them. If you become caught up in what you
          think the market should be doing, you’re most likely to ﬁght it when it does
          something else.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         43


          LESSON 14: KEEP A PSYCHOLOGICAL
          JOURNAL

          When I first began trading, I kept a journal in the form of multiple annotated
          charts. I looked for every major turning point in the stock market and then
          investigated the patterns of indicators and price/volume patterns that could
          have alerted me to the changes in trend. After a while, I found that cer-
          tain patterns recurred. It was out of those early observations that I learned
          to rely on patterns of confirmation and disconfirmation among such mea-
          sures as the number of stocks making new highs versus lows, the NYSE
          TICK, and the various stock sectors. Later, as I gained new tools, such
          as Market Delta (www.marketdelta.com), I added to those patterns. For
          me, the journal was a tool for pattern recognition. Only after an extended
          time of recognizing patterns on charts, could I begin to see them unfold in
          real time. It was also only after an extended period of real-time observa-
          tion that I felt sufficiently confident to actually place trades based on those
          patterns.
               When we keep a psychological journal, the learning principles are not
          so different. At first, the journal is simply a tool for recognizing our own
          patterns as traders. These include:
            r Behavioral patterns—Tendencies to act in particular ways in given
              situations.
            r Emotional patterns—Tendencies to enter particular moods or states
              in reaction to particular events.
            r Cognitive patterns—Tendencies to enter into specific thinking pat-
              terns or frames of mind in the face of personal or market-related situa-
              tions.

               Many of our trading patterns are amalgamations of the three patterns:
          in response to our immediate environment, we tend to think, feel, and act a
          certain way. Sometimes these characteristic patterns work against our best
          interests. They lead us to make rash decisions and/or interfere with our
          best market analysis and planning. It is in such situations that we look to a
          journal (and other psychological exercises) to help us change our patterns
          of distress.


              For more on keeping trading journals: http://traderfeed.blogspot.
              com/2008/03/formatting-your-trading-journal-for.html

              But why do such patterns exist? Why would a person repeat an
          unfulfilling pattern of thought and behavior again and again, even when

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          44                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          she is aware of the consequences? Sometimes traders are so frustrated
          with their repeated, negative patterns that they swear that they are sabo-
          taging their own success. This pejorative labeling of the problem, however,
          doesn’t help the situation. It only serves to blame the frustrated trader,
          magnifying frustrations.
               As I stressed in my Psychology of Trading book, maladaptive patterns
          generally begin as adaptations to challenging situations. We learned par-
          ticular ways of coping with difficult events and those, at first, may work for
          us. As a result, these patterns become overlearned: they are internalized as
          habit patterns.
               A good example is the tendency to blame oneself when there are
          conflicts with others. A child in a home fraught with arguing and fighting
          might adapt to the situation best by blaming himself for problems rather
          than risk conflict by blaming others. Later in life, with that pattern in-
          grained, even normal conflicts may trigger self-blame and depressed mood.
          Such a person, for example, might spend more time and energy beating up
          on himself after a losing day than learning from his losses.
               When we repeat patterns in trading that consistently lose us money
          or opportunity, the odds are good that we are replaying coping strategies
          from an earlier phase of life: one that helped us in a prior situation
          but which we’ve long since outgrown. The task, then, is to unlearn these
          patterns—and that is where the psychological journal becomes useful.
               Just as I used the trading journal to become keenly aware of market
          patterns, our psychological journal can alert us to the repetitive patterns
          of thinking, feeling, and acting that interfere with sound decision-making.
          Such a journal, like the annotated charts that I mentioned, begins with ob-
          servation: we want to review our trading day and notice all of the patterns
          that affected our trading. The initial goal is not to change those patterns.
          Rather, we simply want to become better at recognizing the patterns, so
          that we’ll eventually learn to identify their appearance in real time.


               The psychological journal is a tool for developing your internal
               observer: learning to recognize what you’re doing, when you’re
               doing it.

              A favorite journal format that I use divides a normal piece of paper
          into three columns. The first column describes the specific situation in the
          markets. The second column summarizes the thoughts, feelings, and/or ac-
          tions taken in response to the situation. The third column highlights the
          consequences of the particular cognitive, emotional, or action patterns.
              The first two columns help us recognize the situational triggers for our
          patterns. This makes us more sensitive to their appearance over time. The
          third column emphasizes in our mind the negative consequences to our

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          45

          patterns. Those negative consequences could include emotional distress,
          losing money on a trade, or failure to take advantage of an opportunity.
          When we clearly link maladaptive patterns to negative consequences, we
          develop and sustain the motivation to change those patterns. That third
          column should spell out in detail the costs of the recurring pattern: how,
          specifically, the pattern interferes with your happiness and trading success.
          The clearer you are about the pattern and its occurrence and the more
          strongly you feel about the costs it imposes on you, the more likely you’ll be
          to catch the pattern in real time and be motivated to interrupt and change it.
               For now, however, your goal should be to identify your repetitive pat-
          terns and their consequences—not to try to change those patterns all at
          once. You cannot change something if you’re not aware of it. The psycho-
          logical journal is a powerful tool for building that awareness and under-
          standing what is generating your distress. Keep the journal for 30 consecu-
          tive days to help you see just about every variation of your most common
          patterns. It will also begin the process of turning self-observation into a
          habit pattern—a positive pattern that can aid you in your personal life and
          in your trading.


                      COACHING CUE

          Begin your psychological journal by tracking your individual trades and focusing
          on those situations in which your mindset took you out of proper execution or
          management of those trade ideas. In other words, these will be instances in
          which you failed to follow your trading rules, not ones in which you followed
          the rules and just happened to be wrong on your ideas. Replay these trades
          in your mind—or, better yet, consider videotaping your trading and observing
          those trades directly—and then jot down what set you oﬀ (Column A); what
          was going through your mind (Column B); and how it aﬀected your trading
          (Column C). Zero in on how much money that trigger situation cost you. With
          practice, you’ll build your internal observer and start noticing these situations
          as they are occurring. That will give you an opportunity to create a diﬀerent
          ending to the script.




          LESSON 15: PRESSING: WHEN YOU TRY
          TOO HARD TO MAKE MONEY

          Traders call it pressing: forcing trades in an attempt to make money. Some-
          times it takes the form of trading too large; other times traders press
          by trading too often. The hallmark of pressing is trying to make things
          happen. This is 180 degrees from a mindset in which you trade selectively,

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          46                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          when odds are with you. In the latter frame of mind, you let the market
          come to you and wait for your opportunity. In the mindset of pressing, you
          want things to happen and you want it now.
               The irony of pressing is that it is often the most successful traders—
          those who are competitive and driven to succeed—that fall victim. They so
          hate losing that they’ll do anything to win—including trading poorly!
               Trading is a bit like flying a fighter plane or playing chess: it requires
          highly controlled aggression. In trading, the control element comes from
          knowing when markets present opportunity and when they don’t. One of
          the best ways of instilling this control is to trade with rules. These may
          be rules related to position sizing, stop-loss levels, when to enter markets
          and when to stay out, trading with trends, etc. When rules are repeated
          and followed over time, they are internalized and become mechanisms
          of self-control. We can observe this process among children. They so often
          hear rules about respect for elders or cleanliness that (eventually!) those
          behaviors become automatic.


               The right trading behaviors start as rules and evolve into habits.


               These automatic behaviors are important because they don’t require
          effort and a dedication of mental resources. If we have to make ourselves
          follow rules each time we confront situations, we will be taxed—and our
          full attention will not be on those situations. One of the great strengths
          of the human mind is its ability to automatize rules, so that mental and
          physical resources can be fully devoted to challenges at hand. This enables
          us to face those challenges under self-control (i.e., under rule governance).
               So how do we make our trading rules automatic? The answer is to turn
          them into habit patterns. At one time in our lives, “brush your teeth in the
          morning” might have been a rule that our parents had to impress on us.
          With repetition, it became habit; most of us need no reminder of the rule
          or special motivation to follow the rule. This is the kind of automaticity we
          aim for in trading: where our rules become so much a part of us that they
          require no special attention or effort.
               When we’re pressing to make money, the need to put on trades over-
          whelms our rule governance. Pressing normally occurs in situations in
          which we’re frustrated with our performance. Perhaps we’ve lost money,
          missed out on opportunities, or are just going through a period of flat eq-
          uity curve. The frustration leads us to try to create opportunities rather
          than respond to those presented by markets.
               In our dance with markets, we want the market to lead. When we
          attempt to lead the market—when we try to anticipate what may happen
          instead of identify what is happening—we’re most likely to be out of step

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                        47

          with the next price movements. When we are pressing, we are trying to
          lead the markets, and that has the potential to turn normal losses and flat
          periods into veritable slumps.
                So how do we make trading rules automatic? As with the tooth brush-
          ing, it is through repetition. By repeating your rules many times, in many
          ways, you gradually internalize them and turn them into habits. You will
          still experience the normal stresses of markets—no one can repeal risk and
          uncertainty—but you will be so grounded in your decision-making that you
          cannot fall prey to distress.
                When you coach yourself, you can create opportunities for repetition
          before and during the trading day. This is a several step process:

           1. Make a list of your most important trading rules. These rules
              should include, at minimum, your rules for risk management; taking
              breaks after large or multiple trading losses; entering at defined sig-
              nal points; and preparing for the market day. You can’t expect to
              internalize trading rules if you haven’t first made them explicit.
           2. Create a routine before trading begins to review the rules. Men-
              tal rehearsals are powerful vehicles for creating repetition. Every one
              of your trading rules can be captured as a visualized scenario that you
              walk yourself through mentally while you keep yourself calm and fo-
              cused. You actually visualize yourself in different trading situations
              reminding yourself of rules and following those rules. The more ex-
              tended and detailed the visualizations, the more likely it is that you’ll
              internalize them as realistic experience.


              The more you think about rules and rehearse them, the more they
              become part of you. Repetition creates internalization.


           3. Create a break in your trading day to review your rule-
              following. Midday break, when markets tend to slow down, is a per-
              fect time to clear out your head, assess your trading to that point, and
              remind yourself of what you need to do in the afternoon. By turning
              your list of rules into a checklist, you can simply check yes or no for
              each rule depending on whether you followed it during the morning. If
              you did not follow a particular rule, you jot down that rule on a sepa-
              rate piece of paper, tape it to the monitor, and make it an explicit focus
              for the afternoon trade.
           4. Use the rules at the end of the day as a report card. An end-of-
              day review will tell you how well you performed in your preparation
              for trading, your entries, your risk management, and your exiting of

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          48                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               positions. Each rule should receive an A, B, C, D, or F grade. Anything
               less than a B is a candidate to become an explicit goal for the next day’s
               trading. In this way, the rules you most need to work on are assured of
               getting the most attention.

               This approach undercuts the tendency to press during periods of frus-
          tration by helping you catch yourself in the act of deviating from rules. As
          a result, frustration is unlikely to escalate into ever-greater violations of
          sound trading principles. When you cement your rules through repetition,
          however, you also serve as your own trading coach by preventing frus-
          tration from affecting trading in the first place. After all, we can start our
          day on a frustrating note (perhaps we oversleep), but that won’t lead us
          to shatter our rule-habits of morning personal hygiene. Behavior patterns,
          once overlearned, stick with us regardless of our emotional state. That is
          true self-control.
               Good self-coaching is the ability to correct trading problems. Great
          self-coaching is to develop routines to prevent problems from occurring
          in the first place. You’ll see the results in your mood—and in the dramatic
          reduction of large losing trades, days, and weeks.


                      COACHING CUE

          Don’t work at internalizing too many rules at one time. Start with the most
          important rules that will keep you in the game: entry rules (getting good prices);
          position-sizing rules (limiting risk per position); and exit rules (setting clear
          proﬁt targets and stop-loss levels). These three, along with the basic rationale
          for your trade, can be written down or talked aloud as a trade plan that becomes
          your guide for trading under control instead of pressing.




          LESSON 16: WHEN YOU’RE READY
          TO HANG IT UP

          One of the most difficult manifestations of distress that traders face is
          despair. I’ve seen it happen to the best of traders: you work hard, you feel
          as though you’re on the brink of a positive breakthrough, and then you
          take several steps backward. It feels as though you’re getting nowhere.
          You’re tired of being wrong, tired of losing money. That excitement that
          used to greet the start of the market day is replaced with dread. It’s difficult
          to sustain the research and the morning routines of preparation. If your
          body could talk, its posture would say, “What’s the use?” You’re ready to
          hang it up.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                          49


               Let’s face it: for many, there is a time to give up trading. I know
          quite a few traders who have been at it for years and have never devel-
          oped the skills (and perhaps who never had the talent) to simply reach
          a point of competence where they cover their costs. If you are meant
          to do something—something that speaks to your talents, skills, and
          interests—you will display a significant learning curve in the first year
          or two of effort. If such a learning curve is not apparent, it’s probably not
          your calling. Hang it up and pursue something that genuinely captures your
          distinctive abilities. It’s not quitting, it’s not being cowardly. It’s cutting a
          losing position and getting into something better: a course of action that is
          as sound in life planning as in trading.
               If, however, you’ve progressed steadily and have displayed genuine
          ability over time, discouragement and depression are your emotional chal-
          lenges during difficult periods. Becoming your own trading coach requires
          shepherding yourself through the dark times.
               One of my professors in graduate school, Jack Brehm, theorized that
          depression is a form of motivational suppression. When we perceive that
          meaningful goals are within our reach, we naturally experience a surge
          of optimism and energy. This surge helps us make those extra efforts to
          achieve our goals. Conversely, when we see that valued goals are beyond
          our reach, nature has provided us with the means to suppress that motiva-
          tion. After all, it would make no sense to redouble our efforts in the face of
          unachievable ends. That motivational suppression, taking the form of dis-
          couragement and even mild depression, is unpleasant, but it is adaptive in
          its own way. It turns us away from ends we should not be pursuing, which
          frees us up for more energizing efforts.
               In that sense, the feeling of wanting to give up contains useful informa-
          tion. It is not just a negative emotion to be overcome or minimized. Dis-
          couragement tells us that, at that moment, we perceive an unbridgeable
          gap between our real selves (who we are) and our ideal selves (who we
          wish to be). We no longer perceive that we have control over our future:
          our ability to attain goals that are important to us. If we are going to be
          effective coaches of our trading, we need to address this perception.


              Our real selves are always distant from our ideals: the question is
              whether we perceive ourselves to be competent to bridge the gaps.

              The first way to address the real-ideal gap is to consider that, in its
          context, it may point to something based in reality. Perhaps an edge that
          we had counted on in trading is no longer present. Perhaps market pat-
          terns have changed, such that what was once working for us no longer has
          the same potential. In that event, our hang-it-up feeling is alerting us that
          maybe, temporarily, we should hang it up and instead focus our efforts

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          50                                                      THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          in figuring out what is working in our trading and what isn’t. The key
          word in that last sentence is temporarily. Just because we’re discouraged
          doesn’t mean we should feign optimism: perhaps there’s good reason for
          our motivational suppression. By stepping back, we can investigate possi-
          ble market-based reasons for our feelings.
               Other times, our discouragement may be providing us with informa-
          tion that our expectations are too unrealistic. If, in the back of our minds,
          we’re hoping or expecting to make money each trading day, we’re setting
          ourselves up for considerable disappointment when we undergo a streak
          of losing trades or days that is entirely expectable by chance. In such cases,
          our motivational suppression provides a clue that we need to investigate,
          not just markets, but ourselves. When we expect the best, we leave our-
          selves poorly prepared for the worst.
               There’s a third source of reduced drive and motivation, and that’s
          burnout. Psychological burnout occurs when we feel overwhelmed by the
          demands that we face. Very often, among traders, burnout signifies a lack
          of life balance: becoming so immersed in the stresses of trading that recre-
          ational, social, creative, and spiritual outlets are lost. While such immer-
          sion is possible—and sometimes necessary—for short stretches of time,
          the immersion leaves a trader impaired over the long run. This is not so
          much motivational suppression as motivational exhaustion. It is difficult
          to sustain energy and enthusiasm when we’re operating on overload.


               Burnout occurs when we feel that the demands on us exceed our
               resources for dealing with them.

                In each scenario, the trader who serves as his own coach treats the lost
          drive as information. Maybe it’s a reflection of changes in markets; maybe
          it’s a sign of unrealistic self-demands or a signal that life is out of balance. If
          you feel discouraged about your recent trading, your first priority is to iden-
          tify what that feeling is telling you, so that you can take appropriate action.
                If market trends, themes, or volatility have shifted, altering the prof-
          itability of your trading setups and ideas, then your action should be a
          reduction in your risk-taking while you see which patterns, markets, and
          ideas are working, so that you can focus efforts on those. You also want
          to review your most recent trading performance to see if you can identify
          markets and patterns that have continued to work for you, even as others
          have shifted. Reduce your risk, reassess your trading, and you preserve
          your capital and turn discouragement into opportunity.
                If the feeling like giving up is more a function of your own self-
          demands, then your challenge is to redouble your efforts at goal setting,
          making sure that each day and week starts with realistic, achievable goals.
          When basketball players get into slumps, their coaches will set up plays for

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                           51


          high-percentage shots to get the players back on track mentally. Similarly,
          you want to set yourself up for psychological success by setting achievable
          goals that move you and your trading forward.
               Finally, if burnout is contributing to the lack of optimism, then the
          challenge is to consciously structure your life outside of trading by en-
          suring proper time for physical exercise, social activity, and overall time
          away from markets. An excellent strategy for achieving psychological di-
          versification is to have significant life goals apart from trading. If all the
          psychological eggs are in the trading basket, it will be difficult to sustain
          energy and enthusiasm when profits are scarce.
               Being your own trading coach doesn’t mean talking yourself into feel-
          ing good. Sometimes there are good reasons for lacking positive emotion.
          The superior coach will listen for those reasons and turn them into prods
          for constructive change.


                      COACHING CUE

          How psychologically diversiﬁed are you? How much stress and distress are you
          experiencing in your social life, your family life, and in your general emotional
          state? How much satisfaction are you experiencing in each of these areas? What
          sustains you when trading goes poorly? What problems from your personal life
          creep into your trading day? How is your physical ﬁtness? Your quality of sleep
          and concentration? Your energy level? It’s worth evaluating the nontrading as-
          pects of life as well as your market results with monthly reviews. If the other
          parts of your life are generating distress, it’s only a matter of time before that
          compromises your focus, decision-making, and performance.




          LESSON 17: WHAT TO DO WHEN FEAR
          TAKES OVER

          Fear is a normal emotional response in the face of danger. Under condi-
          tions of fear, we are primed for flight or fight: running from the source
          of danger or confronting it. As we’ve seen, sometimes the dangers we re-
          spond to are not objective sources of threat, but ones that we interpret as
          threats. When we are prone to perceiving normal situations as threats, fear
          becomes anxiety. We experience the full flight or fight response, but there
          is nothing to run from or fight. The danger is in our perception, not in the
          environment.
              When we feel nervous in a trade or feel nervous about putting on a
          trade, it’s important to know whether our response is one of fear or one
          of anxiety. Is there a genuine danger in the market environment, or is the
          danger in our head?

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          52                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Let’s say that I am short the S&P 500 index (SPY) and we get to a prior
          level of support. There is a bout of selling as the NYSE TICK moves sharply
          to −500. SPY hits a marginal new low for the move, but I notice that other
          indexes—the NASDAQ and Russell—are not making fresh lows. The −500
          TICK is well above the prior lows in the TICK for that move. I see signs
          that the selling is drying up. Nervously, I wait to see if any fresh selling will
          come into the market. My order to cover the position is ready to go, and
          my finger is poised over the mouse to execute the order. A few seconds
          go by and the market moves down a tick, up a tick, down a tick. Volume
          declines, my nervousness with the trade increases. In a flash, I act on my
          emotion and cover the position. The odds of the support holding, I decide,
          are too great to risk losing my profit in the trade.
               In this scenario—based on a trade I made just a day ago—fear was
          adaptive. There was a real danger out there. (The market subsequently
          moved significantly higher over the next half hour). I knew to trust my
          feelings and act on my fear, because I could point to specific sources of
          danger: the established support level, the drying up of volume and TICK,
          and the nonconfirmations from the Russell 2000 and NASDAQ 100 indexes.
          Years of experience with intraday trading told me that moves are unlikely
          to extend in the short run if they cannot carry the broad market with them
          on increasing downside participation (volume, TICK).


               Fear is the friend of trading when it points to genuine sources of
               danger: a felt discomfort with a trade will often precede conscious
               recognition of a change in market conditions.

               Note that had I identified fear as a negative emotion and tried to
          push past or ignore it, an important discretionary trading cue would have
          been lost. When you are your own trading coach, your goal is not to
          eliminate or even minimize emotion. Rather, your challenge is to extract
          the information that may underlie those emotions. This means being open
          to your emotional experience and, at times, trusting in that experience.
          Blind action based on emotion is a formula for disaster, particularly when
          what we’re feeling is anxiety and not reality-based fear. But to ignore emo-
          tional experience is equally fraught with peril. When you ignore feelings,
          you cannot have a feel for markets.
               So what do you do when nervousness enters your decision-making
          process?
               In The Psychology of Trading book, I liken such feelings to warning
          lights on the dashboard of a car. The nervous feeling is a warning, a sign
          that something isn’t right. When you see the light go on in your car, you
          don’t ignore it or cover it up with masking tape. Rather, you use the warning
          to figure out: What is wrong? What should I do about it? Depending on the

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         53

          specific dashboard light, you might want to stop driving altogether and take
          the car into a repair shop. That’s like exiting the market: the risk is just too
          great to proceed.
               When nervousness hits, the first thing you want to do is simply ac-
          knowledge that fact. Saying to yourself, “I am not comfortable with the
          trade right now,” cues you to extract the information from your experi-
          ence. The next step is to ask, “Why am I not comfortable? Has something
          important changed in the trade?”
               This latter question is crucial because it helps you distinguish realis-
          tic fear from normal anxiety you might feel in an unfamiliar or uncertain
          situation. I recently bumped up my average trading size per position and,
          at first, felt some nervousness in my trades. When I asked myself, “Why
          am I nervous?” I couldn’t find anything wrong with the trades: they were
          performing as expected. This led me to acknowledge that I was just feeling
          some anxiety about the increased risk per trade. I reassured myself of my
          stop levels and overall trading plan, so I was able to weather the anxiety
          and benefit from the increased risk. I needed to carry out that internal dia-
          logue, however, to see if my body’s warning light—the nervousness—was
          based on a market problem or a problem of perception.


              Fear is a warning light; not an automatic guide to action. It is our
              mind and body’s way of saying, “Something doesn’t look right.”


               Similarly, if you’re experiencing fear about entering a position, you
          want to ask, “Why am I uncomfortable with this idea? Do I really have an
          edge in this trade?” This questioning prods you to review the rationale for
          the trade idea: Is it going with the market trend? Can it be executed with a
          favorable reward-to-risk balance? Is it a pattern that I have traded success-
          fully in the past? Is it occurring in a market environment with sufficient
          volume and volatility?
               When I work with a trader in live mode (i.e., coaching them while they
          are trading), I have them talk aloud so that I can hear their thought process
          regarding a particular trade idea. I mirror back to traders the quality of their
          thinking about their decisions, so I can help them figure out when nervous-
          ness is warranted (the trade doesn’t really have favorable expectancies)
          and when it might not be (it’s a good idea, but you’re feeling uncertain be-
          cause you’re in a slump).
               When you are your own trading coach, you can place yourself in talk-
          aloud mode as well or—if you’re trading in a room with other traders, as at
          many prop firms—you can use a brief checklist to review the status of your
          idea or trade. The checklist would simply be a short listing of the factors
          that should either get you into a trade or keep you in a trade. It’s your way
          of using the nervousness to differentiate discomfort with a good idea and

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008     9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          54                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          discomfort with an idea because it isn’t so good. Many times, fear is simply
          fear of the unknown, the byproduct of making changes. As Mike Bellafiore
          notes in Chapter 9, that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t take the trade.
               I have been trading for long enough that my checklist is well estab-
          lished in my mind. There was a time, however, when I needed to have it
          written out and in front of me. Is volume expanding in the direction of my
          trade? Is more volume being transacted at the market bid or at the offer?
          Is a growing number of stocks trading at their bid or at their offer? Even
          a very short-term trader can review such criteria quickly, just as a fighter
          pilot would check his gauges and radar screen in a dangerous combat sit-
          uation. A fear response cues you to check your own gauges, to make sure
          you’re making decisions for the right reason.

               You can use your fear as a cue to examine your trade more deeply
               and adjust your confidence in the idea, up or down.

                If you can use fear in this way, even negative emotions can become
          trading tools and even friends. Your homework assignment is to construct
          a quick checklist that you can talk aloud or check off during a trade (or
          prior to placing a trade) when you are feeling particularly uncertain. This
          checklist should prod you to review why you’re in the trade and whether it
          still makes sense to be in it. In this way, you coach yourself to make your
          best decisions even when you’re at your most nervous. Confidence doesn’t
          come from an absence of fear; it comes from knowing you can perform
          your best in the face of stress and uncertainty.

                     COACHING CUE

          Find a positive change in your trading that makes you nervous and then pursue
          it as a trading goal. As I describe in The Psychology of Trading, anxiety often
          points the way to our greatest growth, because we feel anxiety when we de-
          part from the known and familiar. Trading a new market or setup, raising your
          trading size, holding your trades until they reach a target—these are nerve-
          wracking situations that can represent great areas of growth and development.
          In that sense, fear can become a marker for opportunity.



          LESSON 18: PERFORMANCE ANXIETY:
          THE MOST COMMON TRADING PROBLEM

          Imagine you’re about to give a presentation to a group of people as part of
          a job interview process. You very much want the job, and you’ve prepared

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008    9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                       55


          well for the presentation. You’re nervous going into the session, but you
          remind yourself that you know your stuff and have done this before.
               As you launch into your talk, you notice that the audience is not es-
          pecially attentive. One person takes out his phone and starts texting while
          you’re talking. Another person seems to be nodding off. The thought enters
          your mind that you’re not being sufficiently engaging. You’re losing their
          interest, and you fear that you might also be losing the job. You decide to
          improvise something original and attention grabbing, but your nervousness
          gets in the way. Losing your train of thought, you stumble and awkwardly
          return to your prepared script. Performance anxiety has taken you out of
          your game, and your presentation suffers as a result.
               Performance anxiety occurs any time our thinking about a perfor-
          mance interferes with the act of performing. If we worry too much while
          taking a test, we can go blank and forget the material we’ve studied. If we
          try too hard to make a foul shot at the end of a basketball game, we can toss
          a brick and lose the game. The attention that we devote to the outcome of
          the performance takes away from our focus on the process of performing.
               This is a common problem among traders, probably the most common
          one that I encounter in my work at proprietary trading firms and hedge
          funds. Sometimes the performance anxiety occurs when a trader is do-
          ing well and now tries to take more risk by trading larger positions. Other
          times, traders enter a slump and become so concerned about losing that
          they fail to take good trades. A trader may feel so much pressure to make a
          profit that she may cut winning trades short, never letting ideas reach their
          full potential. As with the public speaker, the performance anxiety takes
          traders out of their game, leading them to second-guess their research and
          planning.


              More on performance anxiety and how to handle it: http://
              traderfeed.blogspot.com/2007/04/my-favorite-techniques-for-
              overcoming.html

              As we’ve seen in this chapter, our distressful emotions don’t just come
          from situations: they are also a function of our perception of those situ-
          ations. If I’m convinced that I’m a hot job candidate and believe that I
          have many job options, I won’t feel unduly pressured in an interview or
          presentation. When I came out of graduate school, I went to a job inter-
          view in upstate New York and was asked by the clinic director to identify
          my favorite approach to doing therapy. I smiled and told him that I pre-
          ferred primal scream therapy. That broke the ice, we had a good laugh,
          and the interview went well from there. I knew that, if this interview didn’t
          work out, other opportunities would arise. That freed me up to be myself.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          56                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Had I told myself that this was the only job for me and that I needed the
          position badly, the pressure would have been intense. I would have been
          far too nervous to joke in the interview and probably would have come
          across as wooden and not very personable. If I had viewed the possibility
          of losing the job as a catastrophe, I would have ensured that I could not
          have interviewed well.
               Traders engage in their own catastrophizing. Instead of viewing loss as
          a normal, expectable part of performing under conditions of uncertainty,
          traders regard losses as a threat to their self-perceptions or livelihood.
          When traders make money, they feel bright about the future and good
          about themselves. When they hit a string of losing days, they become con-
          sumed with the loss. Instead of trading for profits, they trade to not lose
          money. Like the anxious job interviewer, traders can no longer perform
          their skills naturally and automatically.
               A common mistake that traders make is to try to replace catastrophic,
          negative thoughts with positive ones. They try repeating affirmations that
          they will make money, and they keep talking themselves into positive ex-
          pectations. What happens, however, is that they are still allowing a focus on
          the outcome of performance to interfere with performing itself. The expert
          performer does not think positively or negatively about a performance
          as it’s occurring. Rather, he is wholly absorbed in the act of perform-
          ing. Does a skilled stage actress focus on the reaction of the audience or
          the next day comments of reviewers? Does an expert surgeon become ab-
          sorbed in thoughts of the success or failure of the procedure? No, what
          makes them elite performers is that their full concentration is devoted to
          the execution of their skills.


               Thinking positively or negatively about performance outcomes
               will interfere with the process of performing. When you focus on
               the doing, the outcomes take care of themselves.


              What gives these expert performers the confidence to stay absorbed is
          not positive thinking. Rather, they know that they are capable of handling
          setbacks when those occur. If a given night’s performance doesn’t go quite
          right, the actress knows that she can make improvements in rehearsal. If
          a surgery develops complications, the surgeon knows that he can identify
          those rapidly and take care of them. By taking the catastrophe out of
          negative outcomes, these experts are able to avoid crippling performance
          anxiety.
              One of the most powerful tools I’ve found for overcoming performance
          anxiety in trading is to keep careful track of my worst trading days and
          make conscious efforts to turn those into learning experiences. This turns
          losing into an opportunity for self-coaching, not just a failure.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         57


               Let’s say that you have a very reliable setup that tells you that a stock
          should be heading higher. You buy the stock and it promptly moves your
          way. Just as suddenly, however, it reverses and moves below your entry
          point. You note that the reversal occurred on significant volume, so you
          take the loss. In one frame of mind, you could lament your bad luck, curse
          the market, and pressure yourself to make up for the loss on the next trade.
          All of those negative actions will contribute to performance pressure; none
          of them will constructively aid your trading.
               Alternatively, you could use the loss to trigger a market review. Are
          other stocks in the sector selling off? Is the broad market dropping? Has
          news come out that has affected the stock, sector, or market? Did your
          buy setup occur within a larger downtrend that you missed? Did you exe-
          cute the setup too late, chasing strength? All of these questions offer the
          possibility of learning from the losing trade and quite possibly setting up
          subsequent successful trades. For instance, if you notice that a surprise
          negative earnings announcement within the sector is dragging everything
          down, you might be able to revise your view for the day on the stock and
          benefit from the weakness. When you are your own trading coach, you
          want to get to the point where you actually value good trading ideas that
          don’t work. If a market is not behaving the way it normally does in a given
          situation, it’s sending you a loud message. If you’re not executing your
          ideas the way you usually do, you’re getting a clear indication to target that
          area for improvement. A simple assignment that can instill this mindset is
          to identify—during the trading day (or during the week, if you’re typically
          holding positions overnight)—at least one very solid trading idea/setup that
          did not make you money. That good losing trade is either telling you some-
          thing about the market, something about your trading, or both. Your task is
          then to take a short break, figure out the message of the market, and make
          an adjustment in your subsequent trading.
               By acting on the idea that losses present opportunity, you take
          a good part of the threat out of losing. That keeps you learning and


                     COACHING CUE

          If you track your trading results closely over time, you’ll know your typical
          slumps and drawdowns: how long they last and how deep they become. Know
          what a slump looks like and accept that they will arise every so often to help
          take away their threat value. Many times you can recognize a slump as it’s un-
          folding and quickly cut back your trading and increase your preparation, thus
          minimizing drawdowns. Most importantly, if you accept the slump as a normal
          part of trading, it cannot generate performance anxiety. Indeed, it is often the
          slumps that push us to ﬁnd new opportunity in markets and adapt to shifting
          market conditions. Much of success consists of ﬁnding opportunity in adversity.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008     9:59   Printer: Yet to come




          58                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          developing, and it keeps you in the positive mindset that best sustains your
          development. Every setback has a purpose, and that’s to help you learn: to
          make you stronger. Performance anxiety melts away as soon as it’s okay
          to mess up.


          LESSON 19: SQUARE PEGS AND
          ROUND HOLES

          One of the central concepts of Enhancing Trader Performance is that
          each trader can maximize his development and profitability by discover-
          ing a niche and operating primarily within it. A trading niche has several
          components:

            r Specific Market and/or Asset Classes. Markets behave differently
              and are structured differently. Some markets are more volatile; some
              are more mature and offer more market depth; some offer more infor-
              mation than others. The personality of the market must fit with the
              personality of the trader. Someone like myself, who thrives on data
              collection and the analysis of historical patterns of volume and senti-
              ment, can do quite well in the information-rich stock market; not so
              well in cash currencies, where volume and moment-to-moment senti-
              ment shifts are more opaque.
            r A Core Strategy. The trader’s core strategy or strategies capture her
              ways of making sense of supply and demand. Some traders gravitate
              toward trend trading; others are contrarian and more countertrend in
              orientation. Some traders rely mostly on directional trade; others on
              relational trades that express relative value, such as spreads and pairs
              trades. Some traders are highly visual and make use of charts and tech-
              nical patterns; others are more statistically oriented and model-driven.
            r A Time Frame. The scalper, who processes information rapidly and
              holds positions for a few minutes, is different from the intraday posi-
              tion trader and even more different from the swing trader who holds
              positions overnight. A portfolio manager who trades multiple ideas and
              markets simultaneously engages in different thought processes from
              the market maker in a single instrument. Your time frame determines
              what you look at: market makers will pay great attention to order flow;
              portfolio managers may focus on macroeconomic fundamentals. Time
              frame also determines the speed of decision-making and the relative
              balance between time spent managing trades and time spent research-
              ing them. My personality tends to be risk-averse: I trade selectively
              over a short time frame. I know many other, more aggressive traders
              who trade frequently and others who hold for longer periods and larger

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008    9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                       59

              price swings. Time frame affects risk, and it determines the nature of
              the trader’s interaction with markets.
            r A Framework for Decision-Making. Some traders are purely dis-
              cretionary and intuitive in their decision-making, processing market
              information as it unfolds. Other traders rely on considerable prior anal-
              ysis before making decisions. There are traders who are structured in
              their trading, relying on explicit models—sometimes purely mechani-
              cal systems. Other traders may follow general rules, but do not formu-
              late these as hard-and-fast guidelines. My own trading is a combination
              of head and gut: I research and plan my ideas, but execute and manage
              them in a discretionary fashion. Each trader blends the analytical and
              the intuitive differently.

              What you trade and how you trade should be an expression of your
              distinctive cognitive style and strengths.

               My experience working with traders—and my own experience in the
          school of hard trading knocks—is that much of the distress they experi-
          ence occurs when they are operating outside their niche. Ted Williams, the
          Hall of Fame baseball slugger, offers a worthwhile metaphor. He divided
          the plate into a large number of zones and calculated his batting average
          for each zone. He found, for instance, that pitches low and away provided
          him with his lowest batting average. Other pitches, those high and directly
          over the plate, provided sweet spots where his average was quite high. With
          certain pitches, Williams was a mediocre hitter. With others, he was a su-
          perstar. The source of his greatness, by his own account, was that he
          learned to see the plate well and wait for his pitches.
               A trader’s niche defines his sweet spots. Certain markets I trade well,
          others I don’t. Certain times of day I trade well; others fall short of
          breakeven. If I extend or reduce my typical time frame, my performance
          suffers. If I trade patterns outside my research, I suffer. Like Williams, I
          trade well when I wait for my pitches. If I swing at the low and away balls,
          I strike out.

              One theme that emerges from the experienced traders in Chapter
              9 is that they know which pitches they hit, and they’ve learned the
              value of waiting for those pitches.

              The implication is clear: Our emotional experience reflects the degree
          to which we’re consistently operating within our niche. That is true in ca-
          reers, relationships, and in trading. When there is an excellent fit between
          our needs, interests, and values and the environment that we’re operating

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          60                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          in, that harmony manifests itself in positive emotional experience. When
          our environments frustrate our needs, interests, and values, the result is
          distress. Negative emotions, in this context, are very useful: they alert us
          to potential mismatches between who we are and what we’re doing.
               When you are your own trading coach, your job is to keep yourself
          within your niche, swinging at pitches that fall within your sweet spots and
          laying off those that yield marginal results. This means knowing when to
          not place trades, not to participate in markets. Equally important, it means
          knowing when your advantage is present and making the most of opportu-
          nities. A common pattern among active traders is that they will trade too
          much outside their frameworks, lose money, and then lack the boldness to
          press their advantage when they find genuine sweet spots. It’s easy to see
          careers lost by blowing up; less visible are the failures that result from the
          inability to capitalize on real opportunity.
               I recently talked with a day trader who was convinced that he would
          make significant money if he just held positions for several days at a time.
          Though it looked easy to find spots on charts where such holding periods
          would have worked, in real time that trade was much more difficult. It was
          not in the trader’s wheelhouse; it was outside his niche. Calibrated to mea-
          sure opportunity and risk on a day time frame, he found himself shaken out
          by countertrend moves when he tried holding positions longer. Worse still,
          he mixed his time frames and tried to convert some losing day trades into
          longer-term holds. Outside his niche, he began trading like a rookie—with
          rookie results.
               What is your wheelhouse? What do you do best in markets? If you
          could trade just one strategy, one instrument, one time frame, what would
          these be? Do you really know the answers to these questions: have you
          truly taken an inventory of your past trades to see which work and which
          have been low and outside?
               There is nothing wrong with expanding your niche in a careful and
          thoughtful way, much as a company might test market new products in
          new categories. But just as management books tell us that great companies
          stick to their knitting and exploit core competencies, we need to capitalize
          on our strengths in our trading businesses. As we will see in Chapter 8, you
          are not just your own trading coach: you are the manager of your trading
          business. That means reviewing performance, allocating resources wisely,
          and adapting to shifting market conditions.


               The greatest problem with overtrading is that it takes us outside
               our niches—and therefore out of our performance zones.


             Here’s a simple exercise that can move you forward as the manager of
          your trading business. At the time you take each trade, simply label it as A,

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                           61


          B, or C. A trades are clearly within your sweet spot; they’re your bread-and-
          butter, best trades. B trades are your good trades: not necessarily gimmes
          or home runs, but consistent winners. C trades are more marginal and
          speculative: they’re the ones that feel right, but are clearly outside your
          wheelhouse.
              Over time, you can track the profitability of the A, B, and C trades and
          verify that you really know your niche. You can also track the relative sizing
          of your positions, to ensure that you’re pursuing the greatest reward when
          you take trades in your sweet spots and assuming the least risk when you’re
          going after that low, outside pitch.
              The more clearly you identify your niche, the less likely you are to get
          away from it. That clarity can only benefit your profitability and emotional
          experience over time.

                      COACHING CUE

          If you categorize your trades/time frames/setups/markets as A, B, or C as out-
          lined above, you have the start for good risk management when you go into
          slumps. When markets do not behave as you expect and you lose your edge,
          cut your trading back to A trades only. Many times, slumps start with overconﬁ-
          dence and getting outside our niches. If it’s the A trades that aren’t performing,
          that’s when you know you have to cut your risk (size) and reassess markets and
          trends.



          LESSON 20: VOLATILITY OF MARKETS
          AND VOLATILITY OF MOOD

          I recently posted something important to the TraderFeed blog. I took
          two months in the S&P emini futures (ES) market—January and May,
          2008—and compared the median volatility of half-hour periods within the
          months. During that period, overall market volatility, as gauged by the VIX,
          had declined significantly. The question is whether this day-to-day volatility
          also translated to lower volatility for very short time frame traders.
               The results were eye-opening: In January, when the VIX was high, the
          median 30-minute high-low price range was 0.60 percent. In May, with a
          lower VIX, the range dwindled to 0.28 percent. In other words, markets
          were moving half as far for the active day trader in May than January.
               Let’s think about how that affects traders emotionally. The trader
          whose perceptions are anchored in January and who anticipates much
          greater movement in May will place profit targets relatively far away. In
          the lower volatility environment, the market will not reach those targets
          in the time frame that is traded. Instead, trades that initially move in the
          trader’s favor will reverse and fall well short of expectations. Repeat that

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59     Printer: Yet to come




          62                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          experience day after day, week after week, and you can see how frustra-
          tion would build. Out of that frustration, traders may double up on posi-
          tions, even as opportunity is drying up. I’ve seen traders lose significant
          sums solely because of this dynamic.
               Alternatively, the trader who is calibrated to lower volatility environ-
          ments will place stops relatively close to entries to manage risk. As mar-
          kets gain volatility, they will blow through those stops—even as the trade
          eventually turns out to be right. Once again, the likely emotional result is
          frustration and potential disruption of trading discipline.
               Both of these are excellent and all-too-common examples of how poor
          trading can be the cause of trading distress. It may look as though frustra-
          tion is causing the loss of discipline—and to a degree that is true—but an
          equally important part of the picture is that the failure to adjust to market
          volatility creates the initial frustration. Any invariant set of rules for stops,
          targets, and position sizing—in other words, rules that don’t take market
          volatility into account and adjust accordingly—will produce wildly differ-
          ent results as market volatility shifts. For that reason, the market’s changes
          in volatility can create emotional volatility. We become reactive to markets,
          because we don’t adjust to what those markets are doing.


               Poor trading practice—poor execution, risk management, and
               trade management—is responsible for much emotional distress.
               Trading affects our psychology as much as psychology affects our
               trading.


               Personality research suggests that each of us, based on our traits, pos-
          sess different levels of financial risk tolerance. Our risk appetites are ex-
          pressed in how we size positions, but also in the markets we trade. When
          markets move from high to low volatility, they can frustrate the aggressive
          trader. When they shift from low to high volatility, they become threaten-
          ing for risk-averse traders. The volatility of markets contributes to volatil-
          ity of mood because the potential risks and rewards of any given trade
          change meaningfully. In the example from my blog post, that shift oc-
          curred within the span of just a few months.
               Note that traders can experience the same problem when they shift
          from trading one market to another—such as moving from trading the S&P
          500 market to the oil market—or when they shift from trading one stock
          to another. Day traders of individual equities will often track stocks on
          a watch list and move quickly from sector to sector, trading shares with
          different volatility patterns. Unless they adjust their stops, targets, and po-
          sition sizes accordingly, they can easily frustrate themselves as trades get

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                         63

          stopped out too quickly, fail to hit targets, or produce outsized gains or
          losses.
               Many traders crow about taking a huge profit on a particular trade. All
          too often, that profit is the result of sizing a volatile position too aggres-
          sively. While it’s nice that the trade resulted in a profit, the reality is that
          the trade probably represents poorly managed risk. Trading 1,000 shares
          of a small cap tech firm can be quite different from trading 1,000 shares of
          a Dow stock, even though their prices might be identical. The higher beta
          associated with the tech trade will ensure that its profits and losses dwarf
          those of the large cap trade. That makes for volatile trading results and
          potential emotional volatility.


              Risk and reward are proportional: pursuing large gains inevitably
              brings large drawdowns. The key to success is trading within your
              risk tolerance so that swings don’t change how you view markets
              and make decisions.

               Do you know the volatility of the market you’re trading right now?
          Have you adjusted your trading to take smaller profits and losses in low
          volatility ones and larger profits and losses when volatility expands? If
          you’re trading different markets or instruments, do you adjust your expec-
          tations for the volatility of these? You wouldn’t drive the same on a busy
          freeway as on one that is wide open; similarly, you don’t want to be
          trading fast markets identically to slow ones.
               One strategy that has worked well for me in this regard is to examine
          the past 20 days of trading and calculate the median high-low price range
          over different holding periods: 30 minutes, 60 minutes, etc. I also take note
          of the variability around that median: the range of slowest and busiest mar-
          kets. With this information, I can accomplish several things:
            r As the day unfolds, I can gauge whether today’s ranges are varying
              from the 20-day average. That gives me a sense for the emerging volatil-
              ity of the day that I’m trading. This helps me adjust expectations as I’m
              trading. For instance, the S&P e-mini market recently made a 12-point
              move during the morning. My research told me that this was at the
              very upper end of recent expectations, a conclusion that kept me from
              chasing the move and helped me take profits on a short position.
            r When I see that volatility over the past 20 days has been quite modest,
              I can focus on good execution, place stops closer to entry points, and
              keep profit targets tight. That has me taking profits more aggressively
              and opportunistically in low volatility environments, reducing my frus-
              tration when moves reverse.

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 28, 2008      9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          64                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r When I see that volatility over the past 20 days is expanding, I can
               widen my stops, raise my profit targets, adjust my size, and let trades
               breathe a little more. Not infrequently, the higher volatility environ-
               ment will be one in which I can set multiple price targets, taking partial
               profits when the first objective is hit and letting the rest of the position
               ride for the wider, second target.

              Note that what’s happening in the above situations is that I am tak-
          ing control over my trading based on market volatility. Instead of letting
          market movement (or lack of movement) control me, I am actively ad-
          justing my trading to the day’s environment. That taking of control is a
          powerful antidote to trading distress, turning volatility shifts into potential
          opportunity.


               The Excel skills outlined in Chapter 10 will be helpful in your track-
               ing average volume and volatility over past market periods.

               As your own trading coach, you want to monitor your mood over time.
          When you see your mood turn dark and frustrated, you want to examine
          whether there have been changes in the markets that might account for
          your emotional shifts. Many times, these will be changes in the volatility
          of the markets and instruments you’re trading. Establish rules to adapt to
          different volatility environments as a best practice that aids both trading
          and mood.

                      COACHING CUE

          If you know the average trading volume for your stock or futures contract at each
          point of the trading day, you can quickly gauge if days are unfolding as slow,
          low-volatility days or as busy, higher-volatility days. If you know how current
          volumes compare to their average levels you can identify when markets are truly
          breaking out of a range, with large participants jumping aboard the repricing
          of value. If you can identify markets slowing down as that process unfolds, you
          can be prepared and pull your trading back accordingly.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of stress and distress at the home page on the blog for Chapter 2:

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 28, 2008   9:59    Printer: Yet to come




          Stress and Distress                                                      65


          http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-two-links.html
              Make sure that you structure your learning process as a trader in a way
          that will build success and confidence. This process will help greatly with
          the management of stress and distress. That topic—and especially the topic
          of how to find your trading niche—is covered in depth in the Enhancing
          Trader Performance book, including a section on psychological trauma.
          A detailed discussion of how emotional states affect trading can be found
          in The Psychology of Trading. Links to both books can be found on the
          Trading Coach blog (www.becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com).
              If you’re looking for a book specific to stress and trading, you might
          look into Mastering Trading Stress by Ari Kiev, MD (www.arikiev.com),
          which is written by an experienced trading coach.
              How do emotions affect financial decisions? Two good books are
          Richard L. Peterson’s Inside the Investor’s Brain, published by Wiley
          (2007) and Your Money and Your Brain, written by Jason Zwieg (Simon &
          Schuster, 2007).
              Information on the research of James Pennebaker regarding writing
          as a way of coping with stress and distress can be found on his page:
          http://pennebaker.socialpsychology.org/

P1: JYS
c02     JWBT039-Steenbarger   December 28, 2008   9:59   Printer: Yet to come




                                             66

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




                                     CHAPTER 3




                              Psychological
                               Well-Being
                       Enhancing Trading Experience



                    Happiness is the meaning and the purpose of life,
                    the whole aim and end of human existence.
                                                           —Aristotle



                 ecent research into what has been called positive psychology has

         R       yielded insights into the importance of well-being: positive emo-
                 tional experience. It is not enough to cope with stress and minimize
          distress. If we’re going to maximize performance, it means that we need
          to make the most of our concentration, motivation, and energy. How many
          times have I seen traders miss trades or fail to prepare adequately for the
          day, simply because they were worn down, not operating at their peak? An
          Olympic athlete would never think of coming to his event in less than the
          best shape. Too often, however, traders will risk their capital after being
          sleep-deprived, burned out, or distracted. How you manage your trading
          will depend, in part, on how you manage the rest of your life.
               But what is well-being and how can we maximize it? A wealth of re-
          search, much of it conducted in the past decade and unknown to traders
          and even trading coaches, helps us answer these questions. Let’s take a
          look at how you can coach yourself toward more positive experience—and
          performance.

          LESSON 21: THE IMPORTANCE OF
          FEELING GOOD

          One of the most overrated variables in trading psychology is passion for
          trading or passion for the markets. Self-reported passion means a great

                                                                                 67

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          68                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          deal of things to different people; my experience is that it is only weakly
          correlated with how hard traders actually work at their craft. Traders who
          are desperate for profits, traders who approach markets addictively like
          gamblers, traders who live and breathe markets 24/7: all may claim a spe-
          cial passion for what they do. These passions may or may not support good
          trading and a positive learning curve. Desire and motivation are necessary,
          but not sufficient, for trading success.
               Rather than focus on passion, traders would do well to reflect upon
          the overall emotional tone of their market experience. In researching and
          trading markets, as well as working on trading skills, do you experience
          meaningful happiness, contentment, and motivation? Are you truly enjoy-
          ing what you’re doing?
               This positive side of emotional experience is what psychologists refer
          to as psychological well-being. A person with high well-being experiences
          the following on a frequent basis:
            r A positive mood (happiness).
            r Favorable expectations (optimism).
            r A positive physical state (energy).
            r A positive appraisal of self and life (fulfillment).
            r Favorable relations with others (affection).

               None of us feel all of these things all of the time; indeed, many of these
          five factors may wax and wane depending upon life circumstances. Still,
          psychological research suggests that some of us experience significantly
          more well-being than others. A portion of this variation can be attributed
          to inborn personality traits that are present across a range of life circum-
          stances. Other variations can be attributed to our environment, especially
          the degree to which our settings satisfy or frustrate our needs and affirm
          or contradict our values.

               Much of psychological well-being is a function of the fit between a
               person and her social and work environments.

               When people are chronically unable to experience positive emotions,
          we might suspect the presence of an emotional disorder, such as the
          form of depression known as dysthymia. Other emotional problems, in-
          cluding anxiety disorders, can be sufficiently pervasive as to prevent peo-
          ple from experiencing joy and life satisfaction. In such circumstances,
          it is important for people to seek the assistance of an experienced, li-
          censed mental health professional. Many times, very hands-on approaches
          to therapy—sometimes in concert with medication—can make a huge dif-
          ference when chronic problems interfere with positive life experience. You
          don’t need to be actively depressed—crying, unable to get out of bed,

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                 69

          suicidal—to benefit from psychological help when positive emotions are
          chronically absent.


              The Resources for Chapter 1 include a source for brief therapy
              referrals through the Beck Institute for Cognitive Therapy and
              Research.

               The majority of people, however, experience varying balances of posi-
          tive and negative emotions as a function of life circumstances. When their
          lives affirm their values and needs, they enjoy the emotions listed above.
          When life fails to meet their needs, they respond with unhappiness, frus-
          tration, and diminished energy. In this sense, positive emotions serve as
          life barometers, informing us of the degree to which we’re doing the right
          things for us.
               You can see, then, why positive emotions are so important to trading.
          If you’re trading well, learning and developing, and succeeding in your ef-
          forts, your positive emotions should outweigh the negative ones over time.
          The dominant emotional experience of your work should be the kind of
          pride, satisfaction, and sense of accomplishment that gives you energy and
          optimism. If you’re not trading well, if you’re not growing and developing
          as a trader, and if your efforts are not yielding success, your experience of
          trading is apt to be more negative. You’ll spend less time feeling satisfac-
          tion, energy, and optimism than frustration, overload, and discouragement.
               This is important because the energy and optimism generated by
          happiness and personal fulfillment are what sustain the trader’s learn-
          ing curve. They fuel concentration, and they help traders make the extra
          efforts that result in superior internalization of patterns. The trader who
          sustains high well-being is more apt to have the confidence to aggressively
          pursue good trades and lay off marginal ones. The trader with a positive
          emotional experience is less apt to make impulsive trades out of frustration
          and more likely to have the resilience needed to weather losing periods. In
          short, feeling good is a huge part of performing well, because we function
          best cognitively under conditions of emotional wellness.


              Emotional well-being fuels cognitive efficiency. We think best
              when we feel good.


               As your own trading coach, a constructive step you can take is to track
          your emotional experience over time. A simple adjective checklist filled out
          at the end of each trading day can provide you with a sense for whether you
          are in the emotional zone or swimming against emotional currents. One
          such simple checklist is shown in Figure 3.1.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009      22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          70                                                        THE DAILY TRADING COACH



            Check the Adjective That Best Corresponds to How You’re Feeling Now
               r Happy, Neutral, Unhappy
               r Satisfied, Neutral, Dissatisfied
               r Energetic, Neutral, Run Down
               r Optimistic, Neutral, Pessimistic
               r Focused, Neutral, Scattered
               r Calm, Neutral, Stressed Out
               r Competent, Neutral, Incompetent
               r Growing, Neutral, Stagnant
           Scoring: For each of the first adjectives in the series that you check, give your-
           self a +1 score. For each “neutral” answer, count this as 0. For each of the third
           adjectives that you check, give yourself a −1 score. Add the total. If your total
           score is +4 or higher, you want to identify what you’re doing right to keep your
           mood positive—and maybe even do more of it. If your score is −4 or lower, you
           want to identify what you might be doing wrong to keep your mood negative. If
           your score is relatively neutral, you want to take both of these steps, identifying
           what you’re doing that gives you more positive experience and what you’re do-
           ing that takes away from positive experience. By tailoring your daily activities,
           you can tip the balance between positive and negative emotions in a favorable
           direction.

          FIGURE 3.1 Brief Emotional Checklist

               It is not necessary that you feel great after every single trading day.
          That is unrealistic. Rather, what’s important is the balance, over time, of
          positive and negative emotional experience. If you’re feeling badly at the
          end of trading days more often than you’re feeling good, that’s a clear
          indication that either you’re not trading well—that markets have shifted
          in ways that you have not adapted to— and/or that you’re not doing a suf-
          ficiently good job of advancing your learning curve with clear, achievable
          goals.
               When you take your emotional temperature at the end of each trading
          day, you also can become a better observer of the specific trading behav-
          iors that aid and damage your mood. I learned to limit my losses on trades
          when I realized fully—in my own experience—that outsized losses were
          not only reducing my annual returns, but also ruining my love for and in-
          terest in trading. I also learned to focus on trading strengths when I real-
          ized that these brought me a deep sense of accomplishment over time. The
          idea of trading without emotion is hogwash: as long as we care about our
          performance, our feelings will be engaged when we put our capital at risk
          and pursue our goals. That emotional engagement can work to our favor if,
          through our self-coaching, we sustain a positive emotional state, bringing
          out the best in us.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                     71


                      COACHING CUE

          Be particularly careful to track your well-being around times of great life tran-
          sition: giving birth to a child, buying a new home, moving, undergoing a sep-
          aration in a relationship, experiencing a death in the family, going through a
          major illness, etc. Many, many times these times of transition are also times
          of stress and diminished well-being. Even seemingly happy events, such as giv-
          ing birth, can lead to enhanced performance pressures and diminished sleep!
          Adverse changes in ﬁnancial status are particularly challenging in this regard.
          Consider reducing trading risk until these situations are placed into perspective
          and adequately addressed.




          LESSON 22: BUILD YOUR HAPPINESS

          Two of the essential components of psychological well-being are joy and
          contentment. It is important to have positive feelings about what we’re do-
          ing, but it’s also important to enjoy a degree of contentment with our lives.
          Together, joy and contentment yield an ongoing sense of happiness.
               As the Aristotle quote at the beginning of this chapter indicates, hap-
          piness lies at the center of life. When the Greek philosophers referred to
          happiness, they did not simply mean a positive, sunny mood. Instead, hap-
          piness was intimately tied to fulfillment: the sense of actualizing one’s po-
          tentials and being the person you are capable of becoming. A happy person
          in this sense can go through periods of sadness and loss, anxiety and frus-
          tration. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine a goal-directed life that does not
          encounter such obstacles. What contributes to the happiness, however, is
          the deep sense of being on the right path in life: the sense that you are doing
          what you’re meant to be doing.
               In that context, the opposite of Aristotle’s happiness is not sadness,
          but rather a certain kind of emotional dis-ease: a vague but pervasive ex-
          istential guilt that you’re letting life’s opportunities slip by; that you’re
          settling for less than you rightfully should. Much is written about the neg-
          ative emotional experiences of anger, anxiety, and depression, but little
          about this kind of gnawing guilt. It is not so dramatic as a panic reaction or
          an anger outburst, but it can be equally damaging in its haunting corrosive-
          ness. Day after day, week after week, month after month, to feel like you’re
          selling yourself short in your career, your romantic relationships, and your
          personal development: it’s difficult to imagine a durable confidence and
          self-esteem built on such a foundation.
               Conversely, there is a special glow of satisfaction when you’re im-
          mersed in a truly fulfilling activity. As a psychologist, those moments when

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          72                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          everything comes together and I’m able to make a meaningful difference
          in someone’s life—those are affirmations that carry me through many ses-
          sions of slow, gradual, difficult work. Similarly, to prepare a challenging
          trade idea, execute it with a plan, and then see it make money yields a kind
          of happiness that cannot be achieved by the same profits from a dumb luck
          trade. Pride, not as in overweening arrogance, but as an inner sense of con-
          viction about the rightness of one’s choices, is an important manifestation
          of Aristotle’s happiness.
               Sadly, participation in the markets does not bring this fulfillment to
          many traders. Yes, they feel pleasure when they make money and pain
          when they lose it. But they lack the deep, inner sense of satisfaction and
          joy possible only to those who are pursuing a calling. The reason for this
          is that they are hoping that profits will bring happiness, when in fact
          the relationship works in exactly the reverse order. We profit from our
          life’s endeavors when we pursue our happiness. Just as sexual conquests
          cannot provide the happiness of a fulfilling emotional relationship and win-
          ning a lottery cannot yield the depth of experience possible to one who
          builds a business, profits on trades do not provide the primary emotional
          fuel for a trading career. They are the happy results, not the causes of
          happiness.
               Unfortunately, many traders pursue markets in ways that cannot lead
          to fulfillment. They pursue profits like a pick-up artist goes after sex. Some-
          times they score, sometimes they don’t. There is nothing cumulative in
          their efforts, however: they no more build a career than the barfly builds
          meaningful relationships. Many times, traders recognize that gnawing exis-
          tential guilt: they realize that hours upon hours in front of a screen are con-
          tributing little or no economic value, but also yielding no ongoing sense
          of meaning and satisfaction. It’s not that they’re necessarily anxious, de-
          pressed, or frustrated. They are just empty.
               We can recognize the happy trader because he is immersed in the pro-
          cess of trading and finds fulfillment from this process even when markets
          are not open. I track the traffic to the TraderFeed blog daily and have long
          noted that the visitor count drops precipitously when markets close on a
          Friday and through the weekend. After all, what fun are markets if they’re
          not open and active? This is the mindset of the trading barfly. The happy
          trader finds joy in researching and understanding markets, in preparing for
          the next day and week, in reviewing trading results and tweaking perfor-
          mance, and in generating new ideas and methods. The distinction between
          week and weekend is as immaterial for such a trader as it would be for
          a dedicated artist or laboratory scientist. Indeed, it’s not uncommon for
          these traders to increase their reading during evenings and weekends: they
          are immersed in the entire process of trading, not just the process of mak-
          ing money from trades.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                      73


               You will know you’re pursuing your happiness when you are so
          involved in what you’re doing that you don’t want it to be limited to
          business hours. When you’re in love with the right person, that love per-
          vades all your activities, not just those in the nightclub or bedroom. When
          you find deep fulfillment in markets, you live and breathe markets, not just
          when they can pay you out. A useful self-assessment exercise to carry out
          during the coming week is to log your hours spent on trading outside of for-
          mal market hours and how you feel during those times. Do you get bursts
          of joy when you find new patterns and ideas? Do you generate a deep sense
          of mastery and pride when you work on yourself and improve your craft?
          Do your ongoing efforts at figuring out markets and enhancing your perfor-
          mance bring a sense of pride and satisfaction?
               If you’re not spending as much time on trading outside formal market
          hours as during them, trading is probably not your calling. Can you imagine
          a priest who spent time on his religion only from nine to five? An artist who
          only painted when art shows were active? When trading is truly a part of
          you, contributing to your happiness, you’re most likely to be immersed in
          the activities that build skills and yield pattern recognition. So much of
          trading success is finding the niche that sustains such immersion. Trading
          can be a great job and a potentially lucrative career, but only if it’s also a
          calling.


                      COACHING CUE

          Many traders confuse contentment and fulﬁllment with laziness and smug self-
          satisfaction. Out of a fear of becoming complacent, they resist the experience
          of contentment. As a result, traders are often not content with their progress
          and fall prey to frustration—and the eﬀects of frustration on trading. You can be
          content with your progress to date and still be motivated to move forward. The
          key is setting shorter and longer-term goals, so that you can bask in satisfaction
          when you reach an immediate objective, but still stay hungry for the larger
          objectives.




          LESSON 23: GET INTO THE ZONE

          Most experienced traders know the feeling of being in the zone: seeing
          markets so clearly that the right decisions seem to be effortless. The psy-
          chologist Abraham Maslow referred to these occasions as peak experi-
          ences; researcher Mihalyi Csikszenmihalyi refers to them as periods of
          flow. The hallmark of being in the zone is that the performer feels at

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          74                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          one with the performance, executing skills in a highly competent manner,
          seemingly without conscious effort.
               The zone is not an emotional state, though it brings feelings of emo-
          tional well-being and certainly can be disrupted by negative emotional
          states. Entering the zone requires immersion: a total focus on what one
          is doing. In that sense, the zone is a state of heightened attention: it is the
          result of being fully focused and involved in an activity.
               Note that we can behave automatically—and even in skilled ways—
          without being immersed in our activity and without experiencing the zone.
          Repetitive, routine tasks, such as driving a car on an empty road or walking
          a city street, don’t require particular attention and also don’t usually bring
          any experience of well-being. To enter the zone, one must expend mental
          effort at a task that absorbs all of one’s attention. Though performance in
          the zone may seem effortless, it is far from robotic.
               Earlier—and in Enhancing Trader Performance—I emphasized the
          importance of niche: performing in an area that captures one’s talents,
          skills, and interests. A good barometer of whether you are operating within
          your niche is the relative proportion of time you spend in the zone while en-
          gaged in performance. For me, those flow experiences are relatively com-
          mon when I’m writing. Rarely do I operate from a detailed outline. Rather, I
          think about a topic and let the thoughts and words flow as I type. Similarly,
          when I’m working with a person in counseling, I’m completely focused on
          what they’re saying, what it means, and how to use the information to be
          of assistance. It’s not at all unusual for time to fly by quickly while I’m in a
          meeting with someone; I’m so immersed in the interaction that I lose track
          of the passage of time.
               I most often find a zone state in trading when I’m actively figuring
          out markets—absorbing myself in research—and applying those insights
          to short-term trades. In an important sense, it’s the puzzle-solving aspect of
          trading and not the placing of trades themselves that captures my attention.
          If I try to trade in a mechanical fashion without engaging in the problem
          solving, I find trading psychologically noxious. It’s like talking with people
          in a superficial social context. There’s no meat on the bones cognitively;
          my attention remains unengaged, and I stay out of the zone.
               One of the most damaging psychological patterns I see among traders
          is that they attempt to create a counterfeit zone by trading with too much
          risk. In other words, traders are not intrinsically interested in markets and
          the process of trading, so they attempt to create interest and attention by
          making large wagers on trade ideas. This is problematic for obvious rea-
          sons: it exposes traders to outsized losses and potential risk of ruin. Psy-
          chologically, however, it is also ruinous. Once the trader habituates to one
          level of risk, a higher level is needed to grab attention and interest—much
          as addicts require greater doses of a drug to achieve a high. Eventually the

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                   75


          trader who needs the excitement of risk to sustain interest in trading has
          to blow up. This, truly, is addiction, not passion for markets.


              More on trading addictions can be found in Enhancing Trader
              Performance and here: http://traderfeed.blogspot.com/2006/11/
              dr-bretts-heartfelt-plea-when-trading.html


               One of the most effective ways to exit a flow state—or prevent one
          from emerging in the first place—is to focus attention on oneself rather
          than on one’s performing. You can’t be immersed in a sexual encounter
          if you’re worried about your sexual performance. You can’t find the zone
          in an athletic performance if you’re pressuring yourself to set a record.
          The trader who focuses on P/L during the trade is, to that degree, no longer
          market focused. The dynamics of performance anxiety—thinking about the
          performance while you are performing—is a recipe for disaster if your goal
          is to operate within the zone.
               When I wrote my first trading book, I decided to complete the en-
          tire manuscript before I ever had a signed contract from my publisher. I
          certainly wanted to see the text published, but I wasn’t writing it for roy-
          alties or recognition. The book was written for me, to clarify my thoughts
          and contribute to the body of knowledge within the field. When I wrote in
          this fashion I didn’t have to worry about how the readership would react
          to the ideas, whether editors would like my work, etc. I could just focus on
          the writing. It is very, very difficult to need to perform well and to stay ab-
          sorbed in the performance. The surest way I could have ruined my writing
          experience (and my books) would have been to split my attention between
          generating/writing ideas and speculating about how those ideas would be
          received. Once performance becomes an acute need, not just a genuine
          desire, it is nearly impossible to place the outcome of performance in the
          back of your mind and solely focus on performing.
               So it is for the trader. If a trader needs to make money, it is difficult
          to weather market ups and downs and stay focused on the execution of
          trade ideas and plans. If today’s trade is needed to provide tomorrow’s food
          and shelter, there can be no zone: anxiety naturally takes over whenever
          profits are threatened. Similarly, if I become psychologically attached to
          profitability, basing my self-esteem and identity upon my trading results, I
          no longer control my trading experience: market movements are likely to
          control how I feel. The experience of flow requires a basic level of control
          over what we are doing.
               Perhaps a different analogy will illuminate the issue. My wife Margie
          and I recently invested a good amount of money in tax-free bonds, taking
          advantage of a situation in which their yields had skyrocketed above the

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          76                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          corresponding yields on (taxable) Treasury instruments and certificates
          of deposit. Our plan was to lock in these positions as investments, not
          as short-term trades. Over time, we felt, we would benefit from attractive
          yields and possible capital appreciation as tax-free yields fell into line with
          those of taxable instruments. We could make this investment comfortably
          because it represented less than 10 percent of our savings. Our remaining
          capital was diversified in other investments, working for us even as our
          bonds might move against us in the short run. We could stay focused on
          our overall investment plan because we were so diversified that we didn’t
          need any one position to perform wonderfully.

               Diversification, in life and markets, reduces performance pressure
               and allows us to become immersed in what we are doing.


               Similarly, a trader who risks a small portion of her account on a trade
          can stay focused on executing an overall trading plan, because there is no
          acute need for that position to work out—and no acute threat if it fails to
          work.
               This is a psychological paradox: To best focus on any single perfor-
          mance, it helps to be diversified among performances. If I have a suc-
          cessful experience as a father, husband, and psychologist, I don’t need my
          books to sell well or my trades to make money. It is precisely that emo-
          tional diversification that enables me to stay focused on my writing and
          trading and achieve satisfying returns from them.
               As your own trading coach you don’t need to spend more and more
          time, effort, and emotion on markets. Indeed, if you place all your psycho-
          logical eggs in the trading basket, it is a sure way to burn yourself out and
          stay out of a performance zone. Rather, you can best coach yourself by en-
          suring that trading is one among many fulfilling activities within your life.
          Other eggs might go into the baskets of spiritual interests, artistic activi-
          ties, athletic pursuits, social life, intellectual life, family, community, and
          hobbies. If your life is full in those ways, you are best able to weather ups
          and downs in trading performance. You no longer need trading to work
          at any particular point in time, so you become more able to focus on the
          process of trading and generate and execute good trades.
               So this is your assignment: Give yourself a grade for how much inter-
          est and satisfaction you’ve been achieving from the areas of life mentioned
          above. How diversified are you in your sources of well-being? Then select
          one area for cultivation to improve your emotional diversification. Not only
          will you find a new source of enjoyment and accomplishment, you will
          also lay the psychological groundwork—the inner sense of security and
          fulfillment—to find and stay in your performance zone.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                      77


                      COACHING CUE

          Take short breaks from the trading screen. These breaks can be a great way
          to renew concentration and step back from diﬃcult markets. Some of the best
          breaks are ones that are wholly absorbing, that get you into a diﬀerent zone
          than trading. Physical exercise is one example, talking with people you enjoy
          can be another. I ﬁnd myself wholly absorbed when I play with my cat Gina or
          when I swim in our pool. The activity completely takes my mind away from what I
          had been doing and lets me return with a new perspective. Switch gears—absorb
          yourself physically and/or emotionally—after you’ve been cognitively immersed
          in markets. These breaks can provide some of the most eﬀective trades.




          LESSON 24: TRADE WITH ENERGY

          One of the important dimensions of psychological well-being is energy.
          Happiness, enthusiasm, motivation, and general contentment are difficult
          to sustain when you feel mentally and physically run down. Fatigue is the
          enemy of concentration; physical vibrancy fuels a positive, energetic mood.
               We are like laptop computers running on batteries: after sustained
          operation, we run down. Concentration and attention require effort; even-
          tually we drain our mental reserves and lose focus. This leads to trading
          mistakes: missing opportunities, overlooking important pieces of data, for-
          getting key aspects of trading plans. When we are run down, we’re also
          most likely to fall back into old—and often negative—habit patterns. When
          we’re drained, we might find ourselves eating out of boredom, becoming
          unusually irritated when things don’t go our way, or getting caught up in
          negative ways of thinking.
               Think of it this way: it requires sustained focus to remain goal-oriented.
          To actively direct ourselves, we need an alert, active mind. When we be-
          come fatigued, we lose this active direction. We become passive, respond-
          ing to events rather than making them happen.
               This distinction between active and passive trading is all-important.
          The active trader is one who researches markets, identifies distinct areas
          of opportunity, and consciously executes and manages trades to maximize
          that opportunity. For the active trader, nothing is left to chance: where to
          pursue opportunity, where to sit back, where to take profits, where to limit
          losses—all are preplanned. This takes time, energy, and a sustained focus.
          Good trading, in this sense, is pure intentionality: it is a directed act of will.
               When we are physically drained, we lose the ability to sustain this
          intentional focus. We neglect our research; we fail to calibrate risk and
          reward. We fall back on simple heuristics and enter trades based on

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          78                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          simple reasoning—chart patterns or price levels—that may well lack any
          true risk/reward edge. Worse still, when we’re run down, we become emo-
          tionally reactive and find ourselves chasing price highs or lows or roboti-
          cally enacting rules (fade weak stocks in a strong market) without taking
          the time and effort to assess the broader context our decisions (an trending
          day to the upside).
               Managing your energy during the trading day may take little more than
          ensuring that you:
            r Get proper sleep and proper quality of sleep. Interrupted sleep
              can deprive you of important stages of sleep and leave you feeling un-
              rested, even though you’ve spent a full number of hours in bed.
            r Eat properly. Highs and lows in blood sugar can make it difficult to
              sustain concentration; an excess of caffeine and sugar may provide
              temporary jolts, but can also lead to distracting rebound effects.
            r Maintain your mind properly. I’ve seen alcohol and drugs take a
              fearsome toll on traders over time, as partying the night before leads
              to diminished performance the next day. Conversely, those who are
              focused and intentional in their personal lives tend to see this carry
              over into their trading.
            r Maintain your body properly. Physical exercise is one of the
              most neglected facets of a trading plan. Hours upon hours sitting in
              front of a screen do not promote aerobic fitness. Over time, we lose
              conditioning—and our energy batteries lose their charge.
            r Take the breaks. Not many people can stare at a screen and fol-
              low market action continuously through the day without losing focus.
              Breaks during slower market action can replenish the energy and con-
              centration needed when markets become busier.


               A trading career is a marathon, not a sprint: the winners pace
               themselves.

               None of the above considerations is earth shattering, but it’s amazing
          how poorly many traders score if they incorporate the five factors above
          into a daily checklist. We prepare our trades, but we often fail to prepare
          ourselves for trading. How can we stick to disciplined trading decisions if
          we’re inconsistent in our personal discipline?
               When you are your own trading coach, you cannot afford to run your-
          self into the ground by working so hard that you can no longer work. Nor
          can you so neglect your physical state to such a degree that, like that lap-
          top battery, your memory effects lead you to lower and lower energy states
          with each recharging. Your assignment is to track your daily profits and
          losses simply as a function of two factors: your energy level (high or low)

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                       79


          and your trading mode (active/planned or passive/unplanned). Add a sim-
          ple checklist to your trading journal to help you see the correlations among
          your physical state, your concentration level, your intentionality, and your
          trading results.


              If you lack energy, you will lack focus; if you lack focus, you’ll lack
              intentionality; if you lack intentionality, you’ll lack the ability to
              follow trading plans.


               Unless you calculate and appreciate these correlations for yourself,
          you’re unlikely to sustain the motivation to address—with consistency—
          the five areas above. Once you see that your energy level is directly corre-
          lated with the quality of your trading (and with your trading results), you
          will prod yourself to build a daily routine that addresses sleep, eating, ex-
          ercise, and a healthy lifestyle. You’ll also be able to overcome guilt or fear
          over leaving the screen and realize that opportunity is not just a function
          of moving markets: it’s also a function of your ability to capitalize upon
          those markets.

                      COACHING CUE

          Many traders neglect their family lives (spouse, children) in their absorption into
          their work. The resulting guilt and distraction from those unmet needs wind up
          interfering more with performance than the time it would have taken to spend
          the quality hours together. The mental rejuvenation from vacations—even week-
          end holidays—can renew family relationships and energize work. If you’re too
          worn down for your personal life, you’re probably not operating with good eﬃ-
          ciency in your trading. It’s not necessary to have a totally balanced life—few of
          us do—but if your life feels unbalanced, that will undermine energy, concentra-
          tion, optimism, and eﬀort.




          LESSON 25: INTENTION AND
          GREATNESS: EXERCISE THE BRAIN
          THROUGH PLAY

          One of the core concepts underlying The Psychology of Trading book is in-
          tentionality. We can define intentionality as the ability to sustain purposeful
          activity over time. The ability to sustain attention and concentration, coor-
          dinate a sequence of activities toward a chosen end, and persistently try
          different approaches toward solving a problem until a solution is reached:
          all of these are manifestations of intentionality.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger    January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          80                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                As noted earlier, there is an intriguing connection between intention-
          ality and psychological well-being. In studies of flow, Mihalyi Csikszentmi-
          halyi found that these moments of being “in the zone” result from a com-
          plete absorption in one’s activities. It is when we are completely focused on
          what we’re doing that we reach a state in which performance seems almost
          effortless and completely natural. This is a highly pleasurable state and,
          among creative individuals, becomes a psychological reward in its own
          right. In a real sense, the creator’s passion for her work represents a pas-
          sion for the flow state. Exemplary performance thus provides its own re-
          wards: a psychological feedback system that lies at the heart of greatness.
                This helps to explain researcher Dean Keith Simonton’s findings that
          great individuals across a variety of disciplines are unusually productive.
          They have mastered the art of working within their performance zones, so
          that sustained effort becomes a desired end in itself. Their productivity is
          a byproduct of a kind of positive addiction: a pursuit of the high of the
          performance zone for its own sake.
                As Elkonon Goldberg notes in his excellent text The Executive Brain,
          the various facets of intentionality—attention, planning, reasoning—are
          functions of the brain’s frontal cortex. His research also suggests a sur-
          prising degree of plasticity to the brain: utilize brain functions and you
          exercise those brain regions and strengthen their functions, much as go-
          ing to a gym builds our muscles and endurance. At any given point in
          time, we may possess a relatively fixed quantity of intentionality: we can
          only exercise the brain so much before we become fatigued with the ef-
          fort and need to rest. Over time, however, we can build our brain’s ca-
          pacity for intention by exercising those frontal cortex functions. Just as
          lifting weights is the best way to build our strength, engaging in sustained,
          directed effort is the best way to cultivate our intentional capacities.


               When we pursue goals in an effortful manner, we build intention-
               ality and free will.


               One would think that trading should be an excellent form of mind ex-
          ercise for this very reason. That is not necessarily the case, however. We
          can click a mouse and place trades without engaging in effortful, directed
          thought. This is the passive trading described in the previous lesson. When
          we trade without focused intent, we fail to use our mental muscles. At a
          broader level, when we live our lives on autopilot, those muscles atro-
          phy. All of us know individuals who seem to drift from activity to activ-
          ity, seemingly heedless of the longer-term consequences of their actions.
          They spend money and become mired in debt; they jump into relation-
          ships and reenact past conflicts. Gurdjieff described this as a tendency to
          live mechanically, as if we are stimulus-response machines. We see this

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                     81

          among retirees: after functioning passively over time, even small efforts be-
          come taxing. Life becomes mechanical; the capacity for intentionality has
          atrophied.
               Just as exercising one muscle group will not develop other ones (or
          building aerobic capacity will not confer muscular strength), cultivating
          one form of intentionality does not necessarily raise our self-directed
          capacities in others. Good examples of this are high-frequency day traders
          who develop an amazing capacity to sustain attention in front of a screen,
          as they track bids and offers, upticks and downticks, through the day.
          These same traders are often unable to sustain the kind of mental effort
          needed to observe themselves over time or systematically review markets
          to identify trends and themes. Clearly, we’re most able to sustain concen-
          tration and effort during activities that interest us and that fit with our skill
          sets. The creative talent who stays in the flow is partly able to achieve this
          state because he sticks to the performance niche we discussed in the last
          chapter: a sphere of talent, skill, and interest. Outside of those niches, the
          sheer effort needed to produce results, the frustrations of not getting those
          results, and the boredom from operating outside our values and interests
          all conspire to interrupt flow and disrupt intention.
               This is the dynamic described in Enhancing Trader Performance: tal-
          ents lead to interests lead to immersion in skill building leads to compe-
          tence leads to further flow and the eventual development of elite perfor-
          mance. It is the interplay between the flow state and the development of
          intentionality that creates accelerated learning curves: without flow, tal-
          ents have no place to go; they never evolve into elite skills.
               Many traders fail to succeed because they are operating outside of the
          niches defined by the intersection of talents, interests, and skills. Because
          they attempt something that doesn’t intrinsically interest them and that
          doesn’t play to their distinctive abilities, they rarely encounter flow states:
          their trading brings little well-being. Without the flow, these traders lack
          the motivational impetus to sustain efforts, and that prevents them from
          cultivating intentionality. Then they wonder why they can’t stick to trading
          plans or why they sabotage themselves with impulsive trades.


              The learning curves of elite performers cultivate intentionality as
              they build skills, which means that—over time—elite performers
              can do more with their skills than others.

               What is the first step in performance development? The most common
          response is practice, and that is important, of course. But before practice,
          there should be play. Play tells us which activities are fun and which are
          not. When we play with something, we discover its joys and frustrations:
          its intrinsic interest for us. Most traders who have not found their niche

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          82                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          have never played with markets. They haven’t tried to trade different styles,
          different instruments, and different time frames. They don’t know what it is
          like to hold positions for weeks—or for only a few minutes. These traders
          can’t appreciate the difference between trades made from rapid pattern
          recognition and those made from rigorous analysis. They try to imitate
          other traders, or they take the path of least resistance and trade from su-
          perficial chart or indicator patterns. Elite skills can never develop in such
          a learning environment; intentionality is stunted.
                Elite performers never stop playing. Artists sketch; athletes play in
          scrimmages; actors improvise. Play is a means of self-discovery, and some-
          times we discover passions and talents we didn’t know we had. Your as-
          signment for this lesson is to pick a market, trading style, or time frame
          different from your usual one and conduct paper trading in parallel to your
          usual trading. Your paper trading should document real trade ideas and
          real-time tracking of P/L. The simulated trades should be managed as real
          ones, with profit targets, stop-losses, and decisions about adding to or re-
          ducing positions.
                For example, I maintain a separate, small trading account where I play
          with longer-term trading ideas. It’s a way to test out my research and dis-
          cover possible edges with very small amounts of money at risk. A major-
          ity of ideas in this sketchbook account may fail to bear fruit, but it only
          takes one promising effort to open new doors to opportunity. This keeps
          my mind and trading fresh; it also helps me stay in touch with the market’s
          larger picture when placing bread-and-butter shorter-term trades. Most of
          all, it tells me which trading ideas and strategies truly capture my interest
          and imagination: which may form the promising basis of a new niche. When
          you play with trading, you avoid stagnation; you also discover niches that
          will sustain intentionality and performance. That’s how you build a trading
          career—and that’s how you build the mental muscles that propel perfor-
          mance to ever-higher levels.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you structure your trading preparation like you would structure physical work-
          out routines, then every day you are adding a bit to your capacity to sustain
          intention. I recently observed a trader enter a trade with a strong idea. He was
          stopped out, but reentered the same trade on a fresh signal. That was stopped
          out also. He entered a third time and then rode a trend for a very large winner.
          His resilience was a function of his persistence: his ability to sustain purpose
          over time, even through fatigue and discouragement. His diligent preparation
          each day conditioned him to make extra eﬀorts when it counted, at a time when
          most others would have given up on the idea. When you put eﬀort into trading
          development, you not only prepare the mind, you condition the will.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                    83


          LESSON 26: CULTIVATE THE
          QUIET MIND

          When we think of psychological well-being, we naturally think of joy, plea-
          sure, and vigor. A different facet of well-being is serenity: a mind free of
          distracting thoughts and feelings. In many ways, serenity is vital to elite
          performance: a mind at peace is one that can be fully focused on market
          patterns.
               Most of us spend too much of our time assaulted by stimuli to achieve
          a high degree of serenity. Social interaction, television, radio, music play-
          ers, cell phones, billboards, and computers: much of our day is spent in a
          mélange of sights and sounds. Each calls to our attention, entertaining us
          from without, but leaving us ever more challenged to stimulate ourselves
          from within.
               In the absence of the ability to generate our own stimulation, many of
          us equate the absence of stimulation with boredom. Boredom is an empty
          state, a frustrated state in which there is no-thing of interest. Upon reflec-
          tion, however, we can see that boredom betrays a kind of inner emptiness,
          an inability to find objects of interest in our inner and outer worlds.
               The aversion to boredom is the source of many trading problems. To
          erase boredom, traders will manufacture trades, overtrading—and sustain-
          ing losses—in the process. Traders will take unusual risks and size posi-
          tions too daringly to sustain their excitement and interest. It is ironic that
          many traders consider emotion to be their enemy, when in fact it is the
          boredom of quiet markets that they particularly dread.
               But the aversion to boredom damages trading in a much more subtle
          way. As I stressed in the Enhancing Trader Performance book, trading ex-
          pertise hinges on the ability to detect and act on patterns that occur within
          noisy data. Experiments with implicit learning suggest that we can detect
          complex patterns in situations without being able to verbalize the specific
          nature of those patterns. This occurs routinely when we sense a market
          behaving differently from usual, or when we get an uneasy feeling about a
          conversation. Little children assemble grammatical phrases without know-
          ing the rules of grammar: they’ve encountered so many examples of proper
          speech that they know what sounds right—and what sounds wrong. They,
          like traders and conversationalists, develop a feel for patterns and devia-
          tions from those.
               This gut feeling, the basis of all valid intuition, is not mere hunch.
          It’s the result of countless repetitions of complex patterns. When I first
          drove a car, I could barely stay in my lane. With experience, I now antic-
          ipate potential accidents several cars ahead of me. Many times I tap my
          brake or raise my alertness before I’m consciously aware of the troubling
          situation. If we needed to rely on explicit reasoning for all life’s activities,
          we would never be able to respond quickly to danger. Evolutionarily, it

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          84                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          makes sense for us to be able to develop a feel for reality, as well as a
          conceptual grasp.


               Access to intuition requires a still mind; highly intuitive people are
               not bored by stillness and, indeed, thrive on it.


               When our attention is divided and we are distracted, we lose our
          feel. This is because the implicit pattern recognition manifests itself as a
          felt sense, a subtle kind of awareness. If I am not attending to those subtle
          cues of mind and body, I will miss signals altogether. In such a state, we
          cannot pick up on nuances of conversations or small, but significant shifts
          in traffic patterns. We lose valuable information, and we lose much of our
          ability to react quickly based upon internalized patterns.
               Worse still, in a chronically distracted state, we never sustain the at-
          tention in the first place to internalize complex market patterns.
               This is why serenity—the quiet mind—is so important. With a quiet
          mind, we can attend to the subtle cues of pattern recognition. Undistracted,
          our antennae are extended, able to pick up signals of situations that feel
          right and those that don’t. The experienced trader has seen so many mar-
          kets and perceived so many relationships among market variables that she
          learns to trust these gut signals. It is neither mystical nor irrational. Just
          as a horse whisperer can become one with the horse, understanding the
          most subtle communications, an experienced trader can hear the whispers
          of markets.
               But if the mind is noisy, the whispers are drowned out.


               Those who fear boredom never achieve the still mind.

               The two essential steps in achieving a quiet mind are a still body and
          focused thought. This is where biofeedback can be extremely helpful for
          the trader: it provides a structured method for learning to quiet the mind.
          The biofeedback that I use currently is the emWave unit from Heart Math
          (www.heartmath.com). It provides measures of both heart rate and heart
          rate variability (HRV). The user’s finger goes into a small sensor, which is
          connected to a computer with the biofeedback software. The HRV read-
          ings are displayed in a chart; as readings rise, the chart readings become
          like sine waves. Lower readings create jagged, nonrhythmical patterns. The
          goal is to keep the patterns as sine wave-like as possible. There is also a fea-
          ture that displays the proportion of high, medium, and low HRV readings
          over time, accompanied by audio beeps. You can thus close your eyes (for
          instance, while engaging in guided imagery) and still track your HRV. Even

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                   85

          children can use the unit by clicking on video game features that play the
          game by keeping HRV readings high.
                After a while using the biofeedback, you learn that keeping yourself
          still, focusing your attention, and keeping your breathing deep and rhyth-
          mical is the best way of generating high HRV scores. (Users can set the
          software for various levels of difficulty to build skills.) The emWave is thus
          a training tool—teaching users to control mind and body—and a way of
          tracking focused attention over time. There are other, similar units avail-
          able (for example, Journey to the Wild Divine); ease of use and the appeal
          of the graphical interface will dictate most traders’ preferences. If I had
          to invest in a single psychological tool to aid trading, this kind of biofeed-
          back unit would be my choice. It is highly portable and can even be used
          in real time during trading, with the feedback screen minimized but sound
          enabled.


              Biofeedback is a tool for training yourself to control the arousal
              level of mind and body.

               When you are your own trading coach, it’s important to keep your
          mind in shape much as an athlete stays in proper conditioning. I find that
          5 to 10 minutes each morning prior to the start of trading is useful in bring-
          ing a quiet mind to trading. During that time, you stay completely still in a
          comfortable seated position and breathe deeply, slowly, and very rhythmi-
          cally. Your eyes can be closed throughout and you can focus your attention
          on your breathing, on soothing imagery, or on quiet music through head-
          phones. The key is staying in that Yoda state described in The Psychology
          of Trading: very relaxed, yet very alert and focused. As you practice this
          each day, you build skills, so that you can eventually quiet your mind on de-
          mand, with only a few deep, rhythmical breaths. This is enormously helpful
          during hectic times during the trading day, keeping you out of situations in
          which you become impulsive and reactive in the face of moving markets.
               Just as you prepare for the day’s trading by studying recent market
          action, reviewing charts, and identifying areas of opportunity, it makes
          sense to engage in mental preparation to build the mind-set needed to
          capitalize on your ideas. Your assignment is to devote a portion of each
          morning to mental preparation and the generation of a quiet mind. If you
          have difficulty sustaining the effort or reaching that Yoda state, consider in-
          corporating biofeedback into your morning routine, much as athletes work
          out daily on treadmills and weight machines. Mastering your mind state is
          a key component of mastering performance: if you can sustain serenity
          during the most boring market occasions, you’ll be well prepared to catch
          moves when trading picks up.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          86                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                     COACHING CUE

          If placing trades is your major source of stimulation in ﬁnancial markets, you’re
          bound to overtrade. By cultivating collaborative relationships with peer traders
          and developing routines for generating trade ideas and themes, you need not
          face boredom during slow markets. Other markets, other time frames: for the
          dedicated trader, there is always something of interest.




          LESSON 27: BUILD
          EMOTIONAL RESILIENCE

          Three traders place the exact same trades; all of them lose money. The
          first trader becomes discouraged, curses the market, and gives up for the
          day. The second trader reacts with frustration, vows to get his money back,
          trades more aggressively, and loses a bundle on the day. The third trader
          pulls back, reassesses her strategy, waits for a clear area of opportunity,
          and places a good trade that brings her even on the day.
               What is the difference among these traders? The research literature in
          psychology refers to it as resilience: the ability to maintain high levels of
          functioning even in the face of significant stresses. A resilient person, for
          example, can lose his job, but still function well at home and implement an
          effective strategy for finding new work. The individual who lacks resilience
          is thrown for a loop by the lost job. This interferes with other areas of life
          and makes it difficult to find new opportunity.
               A key reason why many people lack resilience is that they take neg-
          ative events personally. Some portion of their self-worth is connected to
          their individual life outcomes. When events go well, they feel good. When
          they encounter roadblocks, they become discouraged, doubtful, and frus-
          trated. Instead of dealing directly and constructively with the blocks, they
          react to the emotions triggered by their personalizing of events. An inspir-
          ing example of resilience is author Viktor Frankl’s survival in a Nazi con-
          centration camp. He set about writing a book (first on scraps of paper,
          then in his mind) during his internment, giving him a purpose: a reason to
          keep going. Others who experienced the same horrific conditions lacked
          such purpose and ultimately perished. The larger part of persistence is
          nurturing a reason to persist, a greater purpose and vision.


               The survivors are those who have a vision and purpose greater
               than themselves.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                    87

               I recently researched a new pattern that I wanted to trade and saw
          an opportunity in early-morning trading. I vacillated between placing a
          small-sized trade and one more normal in size. I thought about the trade
          going against me and realized that I didn’t really want to lose money on
          a relatively untested idea. With the smaller trade, I didn’t care about the
          implications of the profitability of the trade for my portfolio. A larger trade
          could dent my week’s performance, and that would have been frustrating
          to me. So I placed the small trade, observed the pattern in real time, made
          a small profit, and started the process of integrating the pattern in my usual
          trading.
               In selecting trade size, I was letting my psychological resilience dic-
          tate my risk taking. When I traded to my resilience level, I kept myself in
          a favorable state regardless of the trade’s outcome. “How will I feel if I’m
          stopped out?” dictated my trading size. To be sure, this can be taken to an
          unhealthy, risk-averse extreme. We can take so little risk on trades that we
          severely diminish potential returns. The key is to know yourself and espe-
          cially the limits of your resilience. Occasionally I’ll fantasize about placing
          an über trade on a promising idea and taking a mammoth profit. I realize,
          however, that such a trade can overwhelm my resilience. As soon as the po-
          sition went against me—even in a normal, expectable adverse excursion—I
          would be stressing about the dollars lost. Undoubtedly this would prevent
          me from managing the trade effectively.
               Successful traders learn to build their resilience over time and adapt
          to stresses that at one time might have been overwhelming. That small
          trade I recently placed would have qualified as a large trade back in the late
          1970s when I placed my first trades. Now it is emotionally inconsequential.
          Experience builds adaptation: we can generally handle familiar situations
          with a high degree of resilience.


              When we master one level of challenge, we build resilience for the
              next level.

              The most effective way of to build emotional resilience is to undergo
          repeated, normal drawdowns and see—in your own experience—that
          you can overcome those. Our losses provide us with the deep emotional
          conviction that we can weather losses and ultimately prosper. Someone
          who has undergone many life setbacks and bounced back acquires the con-
          fidence that he can land on his feet in almost any situation. The trader who
          experiences repeated drawdown, only to later hit fresh equity highs, knows
          that she has nothing to fear during normal performance pullbacks.
              When you are your own trading coach, your challenge is not only to
          sustain a high level of resilience, but also to build that resilience over time.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          88                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          A worthwhile exercise is to expand on the routine from my recent trade
          and vividly visualize the worst-case scenarios for trades that you place. In
          other words, once you set your stop level, visualize how you would feel
          and how you would respond in that worst-case scenario. Most importantly,
          figure out what your next course of action might be, including your pos-
          sible next trade. In other words, mentally rehearse the resilient behavior
          that you want to cultivate. You can think of this as play-acting the role of a
          highly resilient person. As you rehearse resilience and act on the rehearsal,
          that role becomes more a part of you. To paraphrase Nietzsche, you’re find-
          ing your greatness by play-acting your ideal.


               In trading, we develop ourselves. Every gain is an opportunity to
               overcome greed and overconfidence. Every loss is an opportunity
               to build resilience.


               Beware: resiliency does not mean that you jump into subsequent
          trades after you sustain losing ones. Rather, the resilient trader is one
          who can sustain well-being even after normal, expectable losing trades.
          When you lack resilience, you become backward-looking and respond to
          the last trade rather than the next market development. The resilient trader
          remains proactive, even in the face of loss. A resilient trader might thus
          stop trading or resume trading following a loss; it’s the following of basic,
          time-tested plans and strategies—and not impulsively running toward or
          away from risk—that defines authentic resilience.



                      COACHING CUE

          If I ask a trader how well he is doing and I receive a dollar ﬁgure as a reply,
          I usually know there’s a problem afoot. Experienced traders think of their re-
          turns in percentage terms, not absolute dollars. Thus, for example, they might
          think of cutting their risk if they’re down 5 percent on the year or limit their
          risk on a trade to 25 basis points (0.25 percent of their portfolio value). If you
          calibrate yourself in dollar terms, you will ﬁnd it diﬃcult to increase your trad-
          ing size or to get larger as you grow your portfolio. Standardize your view in
          percentage terms and you make yourself more resilient; a $20,000 loss on a
          $2,000,000 portfolio won’t feel signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from a $500 loss on a
          $50,000 portfolio. Similarly, when you cut your trading size, you’ll standardize
          your risk management if you’re calibrated by percentages, rather than let losses
          run because they seem small in absolute dollar terms.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                   89


          LESSON 28: INTEGRITY AND DOING
          THE RIGHT THING

          Many of the lessons in this book begin with a discussion of a trading issue
          and then proceed to suggestions about what you can do about the issue.
          This lesson will actually start with the recommendation and then work
          backward from there. Your assignment is to read Ayn Rand’s novel The
          Fountainhead. If you’ve read it previously, the assignment is to reread and
          review it.
               For those not familiar with the book, The Fountainhead is the story of
          architect Howard Roark, who is an unorthodox creative genius. He faces
          stiff opposition to his ideas, including the ambivalence of the woman he
          loves. Throughout, he must decide whether to abandon or compromise his
          ideals, especially as he sees lesser talents succeed commercially by pan-
          dering to public fashion. In many ways, The Fountainhead is a study in
          integrity and the difficulty and importance of doing the right thing.
               There can be no self-esteem without a self: a well-defined sense of
          who one is and what one stands for. There are many false substitutes for
          self-esteem, including the approval of others and the size of one’s trading
          account. Ultimately, however, self-esteem is a function of knowing yourself
          and remaining true to your values: possessing a vision of what can be and
          remaining faithful to that vision.
               Many traders have no more vision than a desire to make money.
          There’s nothing wrong with making money, of course, and for those
          who do so through the independent efforts of mind, such earnings are
          a rightful source of pride. Traders who attempt to latch onto holy grails
          instead of independently relying on their planning and judgment, however,
          substitute the desire for a quick, easy score for the more difficult challenge
          of developing competency in reading and acting on market patterns.
          Someone who consummates a long-term courtship and someone who
          hooks up for a one-night stand engage in the same physical act, but the
          meaning is completely different. One is an expression of esteem; the other
          is often a flight from self.


              In so many fields, we never see the fruits of our labors; we’re part
              of a larger team and process. Trading is unique in that we alone are
              responsible for what we earn, and we see each day the outcomes
              of our efforts.


             When you read The Fountainhead, it’s instructive to reflect on how
          Howard Roark would approach the field of trading. Would he join a

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          90                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          proprietary trading firm that frantically searches for stocks in play, robot-
          ically fading moves or chasing strength or weakness? The mere thought is
          ludicrous. Would he attend a few seminars or read a couple of books and
          trade the same untested chart patterns as other beginners? It’s unthinkable.
               No, Howard Roark the trader would be a keen student of markets, just
          as Roark the architect was a devoted student of building materials and
          methods. He wouldn’t trade a single method in all markets, just as he didn’t
          repeat the same design to fit all housing sites. Rather, he would carefully
          consider each unique situation and tailor the strategy to fit the present con-
          text. Roark the trader would work from carefully considered plans, just as
          he worked from blueprints that he had developed from scratch. In short,
          Roark would approach trading the same way he approached architecture:
          as an expression of his creative vision and the sheer joy of giving birth to
          something new and valuable.
               Most of all, Roark the trader, like the architect Roark, would stand
          for something. He would have a view of markets and how and why mar-
          kets move, just as he had a view of design and building. It would be his
          view, not something borrowed slavishly from tradition or current fads.
          The odds are good that this view would be unconventional and meet with
          more than a little skepticism by the self-appointed gurus of trading. That
          wouldn’t matter. Roark the trader would remain faithful to his framework.
          When confronted with the choice of following the crowd versus act on his
          convictions, he wouldn’t hesitate to do the right thing.


               Every great trader I have known has an outlook and a set of meth-
               ods that are distinctively his own.

               For that reason, economic success for trader Roark would be a tangi-
          ble indicator of his efficacy and the rightness of his efforts. It is effect, not
          cause. He doesn’t trade to simply make money any more than he builds to
          sell homes and office buildings. Roark the architect built because that was
          what he was meant to do. Even when he didn’t have clients, he was design-
          ing buildings in his mind and in his sketches. Similarly, trader Roark would
          be tracking and investigating markets even if he wasn’t placing orders. His
          work is an extension of who he is; his profits are the result of years of effort
          and integrity.
               One’s work could entail raising a child, building a business, design-
          ing a high-rise structure, or developing a unique framework for analyz-
          ing and trading financial markets. Each, to be accomplished well, requires
          sustained, dedicated effort; a vision of what can be; and a willingness
          to pursue that vision even when it’s more comfortable to slide by. This
          is the true source of emotional resilience: a pride and esteem so deep

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger      January 9, 2009     22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                       91


          that one is unwilling to compromise oneself in the face of setbacks and
          disappointments.
               What about your trading is uniquely yours? What have you developed
          that most distinctly distinguishes you as a trader? What is the vision behind
          your trading? That is your core, your essence as a trader. When you’re trad-
          ing well, you’re remaining true to that essence, and that will serve you well
          during the most challenging times. If you can’t provide detailed answers
          to these questions, are you truly ready to be risking your capital? Will you
          really have the confidence to weather adversity, with only borrowed ideas
          and methods to draw upon? Read Chapter 9 of this book carefully; you’ll
          see that experienced traders build a career from their work from figuring
          markets out for themselves and then remaining true to their ideas and to
          the evidence of their senses.


                      COACHING CUE

          This lesson shows why it is so important to follow one’s trading plans. The
          plans may not be perfect, and they may not work well at times. If, however,
          you are to build conﬁdence in your judgment and train yourself to act with
          integrity, there’s no alternative to following the ideas you believe to be correct.
          You cannot build conﬁdence by abandoning your convictions and contradicting
          your perceptions. The clearer you are about your market views, mapping out
          your actions under various scenarios and your rationales for trades, the easier
          it will be to act on your judgment and see, in your own experience, your own
          progress and growth.




          LESSON 29: MAXIMIZE CONFIDENCE
          AND STAY WITH YOUR TRADES

          A great deal has been written about risk management and the importance
          of stop-losses. A stop-loss, ideally, is that point that tells you that your ini-
          tial trade idea is wrong. Traders establish firm stops that are closer to the
          point of entry than the price targets and help ensure a favorable risk/reward
          profile to each trade. You can generally tell a professional trader by the way
          she closes out a losing trade. The exit is automatic, not a cause for conster-
          nation. Loss is an accepted part of the game. The good traders learn from
          those losses and use them to revise market views. A losing trade, as a re-
          sult, can set up the next winning trade.
               Much harder for many traders and far less remarked upon is
          something we might call stop-profits. Traders who religiously adhere

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          92                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          to stop-losses can find it difficult to let profits run on winning trades.
          They stop those profits out prematurely, reducing the reward portion of
          the risk/reward profile. Over time, these traders have trouble succeed-
          ing, because their winning trades end up being not much larger than their
          losers—and sometimes smaller.
               There are a few reasons that traders tend to cut profits short. One rea-
          son is that they fail to identify profit targets as clearly as stop-loss points.
          Such targets may be based on a number of factors, such as the market’s
          overall volatility, the presence of distinct support and resistance levels, and
          the time frame of the pattern being traded. Many of my trades, for exam-
          ple, are based on historical analyses of the probability of hitting particular
          price levels (previous day’s high or low; pivot point levels based on the
          prior day’s high-low-close); those levels then serve as targets for setups. It
          is much easier to stick with a trade when there is a firm target in mind,
          just as it’s easier to get work done when you have a clear goal in mind.
          Without a predefined target, it’s easy to get caught up in the tick-by-tick ups
          and downs of the market, acting on fear and greed unrelated to the initial
          trade idea.
               Another culprit in those stop-profit scenarios is a lack of confidence
          in one’s trade ideas. One of the important advantages of testing one’s trad-
          ing setups is that you can estimate the historical odds of a market acting
          in your favor. That knowledge can provide the security necessary to see
          the trade through to its ultimate target. When trade setups and patterns
          are borrowed from others without prior testing (either through one’s own
          paper trading or through historical analysis), it is difficult to have a deep,
          inner sense of confidence in the ideas. As markets experience normal re-
          tracements on the way to a profit target, those adverse excursions become
          difficult to weather. Instead of seeing them as potential opportunities to
          add to the trade at good prices, it’s easy to perceive them as threats to
          paper profits.
               Finally, a trader’s risk aversion may play a role in prematurely stopping
          out profits. Suppose you have a choice between taking a sure $1,000 profit
          versus a 75 percent chance at $1,500 and a 25 percent chance at $500. Over
          time, taking the 75 percent chance will make you more money. Nonethe-
          less, at any given point in time, a person may feel that it’s foolish to walk
          away from a sure $1,000. In such a situation, the decision is made as much
          for the trader’s peace of mind as for overall profitability. Similarly, traders
          may set stop-profit levels to achieve a sense of certainty, not to maximize
          returns.
               Seeing a trade through to its target requires an unusual degree of se-
          curity and ability to tolerate uncertainty. As the trade moves further in
          your favor, you have more money in paper profits that you’re exposing to
          future risk, even if the risk/reward picture remains favorable. This ability

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                  93


          to sit through a trade’s uncertainty as profits accumulate requires particu-
          lar confidence in the initial trade plan. Ironically, it takes more confidence
          to stay in the trade as it goes in your favor than if it remains in a narrow
          range, simply because more paper profits are at stake.


              It usually takes more confidence to sit in a winning trade than to
              enter it.

               So how does one achieve the level of confidence needed to sit through
          good trades? Often it’s not the loss of the paper profits per se that are the
          real threat for traders. After all, if a trade moves your way and you pru-
          dently raise your stop-loss level to breakeven, you’ll never get hurt by a
          sudden, unusual adverse excursion. As disappointing as it may be to lose a
          paper profit, it’s hardly, in itself, a threat to one’s account.
               Rather, the threat to traders lies in how they would process such a re-
          tracement. In many cases, their attitude would become quite negative in the
          face of lost profits. They might criticize themselves for the missed opportu-
          nity or lapse into an uncomfortable state of frustration. Instead of viewing
          the reversal of a gain as nothing lost—simply a scratched trade—they treat
          it as a situation calling for blame. It’s the self-blame and the discomfort of
          second-guessing that traders are avoiding, not the (paper) dollar loss itself.
          “You’re never wrong taking a profit,” is an attitude that speaks more to this
          psychological reality than to the logical necessity of taking larger winners
          than losers.


              Traders often think they’re managing a trade when they exit pre-
              maturely, when in fact they’re managing their thoughts and feel-
              ings about that trade.


               A large part of confidence is trust. You have confidence in your mar-
          riage because you trust your spouse. You have confidence in your driv-
          ing because you trust your ability to maneuver the car under changing
          road conditions. If you don’t act on your trade ideas—that is, by not see-
          ing them through to their planned conclusion—you actually undercut your
          confidence by never allowing yourself to develop trust in those ideas. Just
          as mistrust of a spouse cannot lead to security in a marriage, a failure to
          trust your time-tested ideas cannot bring confidence to your trading. You
          can only endure the uncertainty of the trade that moves in your favor by
          seeing—in your own experience—that the discomfort is indeed endurable,
          and that you gain far more than you lose by sticking with your planned
          trades.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009     22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          94                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              As your own trading coach, it’s important that you instill both trust and
          confidence in your trading. This can be accomplished in two ways:

            r Instill the confident mindset. Before trading starts, you want to
              mentally rehearse how you would talk to yourself in the event that you
              have to scratch a trade after having a paper profit. Specifically, you
              would rehearse a mindset of “nothing ventured, nothing gained”—it’s
              okay to scratch a smaller percentage of trades if that allows you to let
              a larger percentage run—rather than a self-blaming, frustrated mind-
              set. Prepare yourself in advance for adverse excursions so you remove
              much of their threat value.
            r Build on small change. A useful brief therapy principle is to start
              making large changes by just starting with small changes. If you do just
              a little of the right thing, you will provide the feedback and encourage-
              ment necessary to expand those efforts. In the case of trading, this is
              easy: even if you take much of your position off ahead of a planned
              target, leave a small piece of the position on to either hit the target
              or scratch out. This preserves profits and assuages risk-aversion while
              it enables you to have the firsthand experience of seeing your ideas
              through to their conclusion. Over time, you can leave on larger pieces
              and build performance that way.

               Confidence is not just a function of how you think, but also how you
          act. If you act in a way to trust your judgment, you’ll have the opportunity
          to see your judgment work out—and that will build confidence. The stop-
          profit scenario, unfortunately, is a stop-confidence one as well. If you act
          with confidence—even in small measure—you coach yourself to self-trust
          and a deeper internalization of that confidence.



                     COACHING CUE

          The ﬂip side of the impulsive trader is the perfectionist. I’ve seen many traders
          come up with great trade ideas, only to never participate in them because the
          market never came to their desired entry levels. Coming up with a big, win-
          ning idea and then seeing it work out without you on board can be supremely
          frustrating. Don’t let the perfect become the enemy of the good. If you have a
          fantastic idea—for instance, you see a market break out and enter a trending
          mode—get on board with at least a small piece of your maximum position size.
          If it’s a good trend, you can always add to the position later on countertrend
          moves; if it’s not a good trend, you can exit with a modest loss. But always
          try to let your trading positions express your convictions: you always beneﬁt
          psychologically when you act on your conﬁdence.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                  95


          LESSON 30: COPING—TURN STRESS
          INTO WELL-BEING

          We have seen that stress does not need to become distress if it is balanced
          with generous amounts of well-being. People can endure high levels of
          challenge, pressure, and uncertainty if their work is meaningful to them
          and they experience rewards tied to their efforts.
               We can think of coping as a set of strategies for handling stressful sit-
          uations so that they don’t become distressful. By coping effectively with
          the risks and uncertainties of markets and the demands of the learning
          curve, traders can go a long way toward maintaining a favorable emotional
          balance.
               Psychological research tells us that there is no single most effective
          coping strategy. Rather, people with different personalities and needs em-
          ploy different coping patterns to best handle situations. When you are your
          own trading coach, it is important to know how you cope best with trading
          stresses, so that you can activate these strategies on demand.
               This knowledge is especially crucial because, at times of greatest
          stress, we often lapse into old, well-worn coping patterns that may have
          worked at one time, but may not be appropriate to the current situation.
          An avoidant coping pattern may have worked in past work situations in-
          volving interpersonal conflict, but would be disastrous if employed in the
          middle of a losing trade in a fast-moving market. Doing what comes natu-
          rally is not necessarily the best strategy for handling stress. As we will see
          in Chapter 5, those past, overlearned modes of coping are often what keep
          us locked into cyclical problem patterns.
               One example that I commonly encounter involves traders who utilize
          highly confrontive coping strategies. Many traders have aggressive person-
          alities and succeed by facing challenges head on. This can work quite well
          in situations where one must negotiate a business deal or handle a piece
          of bad news. In the markets, however, the aggressive response is not al-
          ways the best one. When facing a series of losing trades—something that
          happens to all of us—traders can become more aggressive and confront
          the situation by trading more and larger. This way of handling frustration
          leads a trader to take maximum risk when he is seeing the market least
          clearly—a virtual formula for catastrophic drawdowns.

              You can often recognize failed coping strategies when you look
              back on your actions and wonder what could possibly have led
              you to behave that way.

              So how can you know which coping strategies work best for you in
          particular situations? Below is a checklist that will help you sort out your

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21     Printer: Yet to come




          96                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          different ways of handling trading problems. For this lesson’s exercise, I’d
          like you to think back to several situations in which you’ve handled trading
          problems effectively and several situations in which you’ve handled them
          poorly. Next to each coping strategy, place a checkmark if it’s a mode of
          coping that you utilized when trading well. Then, next to each item on the
          list, place a circle if it’s a mode of coping that you utilized when trading
          poorly. Here we go:
           1. I reached out to others for ideas or feedback            .
           2. I took steps to make sure I didn’t overreact         .
           3. I stepped back from the situation and figured out what to do next             .
           4. I tried to not make a big deal out of the problem            .
           5. I looked for what I could take away from the situation that would help
              me in the future      .
           6. I made a concerted effort to tackle the problem there and then            .
           7. I recognized my mistake and took action         .
           8. I decided to stop trading for a while and regain perspective          .
               Once again, the key is not to figure out the right and wrong coping
          strategies, but rather the ones that have worked best for you—and the ones
          that have been associated with problem patterns in your trading.
               One important dimension of coping is action/reflection. Some people
          benefit most by taking prompt action to own and address challenges; oth-
          ers step back, get themselves under control, put things in perspective,
          think through plans, and/or consult with others. Another key dimension
          is problem-focused versus emotion-focused coping. Some traders respond
          best to situations by first venting and getting things off their chest, reaching
          out to others for input and support, and working actively to dampen neg-
          ative emotions. Other traders fare best by putting feelings aside, analyzing
          situations, and engaging in active problem solving to address problems.
               Often traders run into problems when they fail to enact their best
          coping strategies. The analytical trader can get hurt when he finds him-
          self venting emotion and confronting problems without prior reflection and
          planning. The trader who thrives on social support and feedback from oth-
          ers is unlikely to cope effectively if she becomes discouraged and isolates
          herself from valued peers.

               If you contrast your best and worst coping—the times when you’ve
               handled trading problems most and least effectively—you identify
               what you need to do to sustain a favorable balance between well-
               being and distress.

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger     January 9, 2009    22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Psychological Well-Being                                                  97


              When you track how you cope when you are trading well, you cre-
          ate a mental model of your best ways of handling trading challenges.
          This model can then become a script that you can draw on during times
          of difficulty. Make a coping checklist a part of your daily journal; it will
          alert you to behavior patterns that you can build on for the next market
          challenge.



                     COACHING CUE

          Think of your best and worst coping patterns as being sequences of actions,
          not just isolated strategies. Thus, for instance, when I’m coping well, I ﬁrst
          take steps to calm myself and get focused; then I engage in concrete prob-
          lem solving. I best cope with losses by analyzing them to death—ﬁguring out
          what went wrong—and then drawing positive learning lessons from those. When
          I’m coping poorly, I don’t calm myself, and blame myself instead, adding a
          second bad trade to the ﬁrst as a way of making up for the loss. In my poor
          coping mode, I don’t analyze my losers, instead turning my attention to more
          promising markets, instruments, or setups. That ensures that I’ll learn noth-
          ing from my loss—and that my error will repeat itself at some juncture. Think
          of coping as sequences of behaviors, so we can develop mental blueprints
          for the actions we need to take in the most challenging market conditions.
          This helps ensure that trading stress does not generate performance-robbing
          distress.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of stress and distress at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          3: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-three-links.html
               One of the early texts summarizing research into positive psychology
          is Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, edited by Daniel
          Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz and published by the Russell
          Sage Foundation (1999). Another worthwhile reference work is the Hand-
          book of Positive Psychology, edited by C.R. Snyder and Shane J. Lopez and
          published by Oxford University Press (2003) and, by those same authors,
          Positive Psychology: The Scientific and Practical Explorations of Human
          Strengths (Sage Publications, 2006).

P1: JYS
c03     JWBT039-Steenbarger   January 9, 2009   22:21    Printer: Yet to come




          98                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              How our emotions affect our health and well-being is the topic of
          James W. Pennebaker’s edited text Emotions, Disclosure, and Health,
          published by the American Psychological Association (1995).
              A number of free articles covering topics of stress, coping, and emo-
          tions in trading can be found in the section “Articles on Trading Psychol-
          ogy” at www.brettsteenbarger.com/articles.htm.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008    13:2    Printer: Yet to come




                                     CHAPTER 4



                              Steps toward
                                  Self-
                              Improvement
                               The Coaching Process


                    Success does not consist in never making mistakes
                    but in never making the same one a second time.
                                                —George Bernard Shaw



                    hat are the core processes of self-coaching? What concrete steps

         W          can we take to make changes in our trading to improve perfor-
                    mance? These are some of the topics we’ll tackle in this chapter.
               Much of this chapter comes from research over the past several
          decades that has illuminated common effective ingredients across all coun-
          seling and therapy approaches. An interesting finding from that research is
          that all of the major approaches to counseling appear to be more effect-
          ive than no counseling at all, but no single approach consistently shows
          better results across a range of people and problems. Not only do the ma-
          jor modes of helping seem to work equivalently, they also seem to work
          for many of the same reasons. Those reasons capture the essence of what
          creates change—and what can fuel our efforts to become our own trading
          coaches.



          LESSON 31: SELF-MONITOR BY
          KEEPING A TRADING JOURNAL

          Self-monitoring refers to methods that you use to track your own patterns
          of thought, feeling, and behavior over time. Self-monitoring is the founda-
          tion for many of the other self-coaching techniques described in this chap-
          ter, because it tells us what we need to change. We can’t alter a pattern

                                                                                   99

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          100                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          if we’re not aware of its existence. Very often in brief therapy, the first
          homework exercises involve self-monitoring. Just as observing market
          patterns precede our ability to trade them, becoming aware of our own
          patterns is the first step in changing them.
               One of the most common ways to monitor oneself is through the use of
          trading journals. Active intraday traders might make entries during a mid-
          day break and at the end of the trading day; others might simply write in
          the journal at the end of each day in which they are making trading deci-
          sions. The key is to catch your patterns as soon after they occur as possible,
          rather than rely upon fallible memory.
               Note that self-monitoring is not a change technique in itself, but it
          often leads to changes. Once you see your patterns with crystal clarity—
          including their costly consequences—it becomes much easier to inter-
          rupt them and prevent their future occurrence. At other times, self-
          monitoring may alert you to patterns that you didn’t know were present.
          This is exceedingly valuable, as it lays the groundwork for change that
          otherwise would have been impossible.
               Any time you systematically review your performance over time—and
          the factors associated with successful and unsuccessful performance—
          you’re engaging in self-monitoring. For example, I reviewed my recent trad-
          ing results trade by trade and found that I was taking larger point losers on
          small trades than on my larger ones. This review led to the realization that,
          when trades were quite small, I was not as vigilant in setting and sticking
          to stop-loss levels. Although the total dollar loss for each small trade was
          not huge, over time the small losses added up. This led me to establish a
          new routine for setting and sticking to stop-losses with small trades by ex-
          plicitly writing out my risk/reward ratio for each trade before I placed the
          order. The self-monitoring made me more conscious of what I was doing,
          which in turn kept me trading well.


              Self-monitoring is the foundation on which all coaching efforts are
              built.


               My experience is that the best predictor of failure in the trading profes-
          sion is the inability to sustain self-monitoring. This inability leaves traders
          unable to clearly identify their problem patterns, and it prevents them from
          reflecting and learning from their efforts at change. Goals without self-
          monitoring are but mere good intentions; they never translate into concrete
          actions to initiate and sustain change.
               Why would a trader, seemingly desirous of success, not sustain ef-
          forts to monitor her own thoughts, emotions, and/or trading performance?

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               101


          I believe it’s because many traders are motivated by trading and making
          money, not by a desire to understand themselves and markets. This is an
          important distinction. To paraphrase coach Bob Knight, they are motivated
          to win, but not motivated to do the work it takes to become a winner. In
          the best traders, self-mastery is a core motivation. It’s why they continue
          trading long after they could have comfortably retired.
               The most common format for beginning a regimen of self-monitoring is
          keeping a journal. The basic components of a self-monitoring journal might
          look as follows:
               Divide your journal page into three columns. The first column de-
          scribes the trade that was placed, including the trade size and the time
          of day. If you scale into a single position, you would treat that as a single
          entry in the journal. Similarly, if you enter several positions to capitalize on
          a single trade idea (e.g., you want to be long precious metals, so you buy
          three different mining stocks), those would also be incorporated within a
          single journal entry. The first column might thus summarize what you did
          for each trade idea, how much you risked on the idea, when you placed
          the trades, the prices that you paid, and how you placed the trades (e.g.,
          all at once or by scaling in; executed at the market or with limit orders). If
          you are a high-frequency trader, consider the possibility of automating your
          trade monitoring with tools such as StockTickr (www.stocktickr.com) or
          Trader DNA (www.traderdna.com).
               The second column would summarize the outcomes of the trades, in-
          cluding the prices and times of your exits, your P/L for that trade (or trade
          idea), and how you exited the trades (e.g., all at once or scaling out, at the
          market or by working orders).
               The third column would include all of your behavioral observations
          for that particular trade or trade idea: what you were thinking, how you
          were feeling, your preparation for that trade, your degree of confidence in
          the trade, etc. In other words, the third column takes a look at you and
          your state of mind, thought patterns, and physical state during the trades.
          The third column could also include observations about how well you en-
          tered, managed, and exited the trades. Whatever stands out for you—good
          or bad—about the trade would be included in that third column.


              Keep your trading journal doable; many efforts at self-monitoring
              fail because they become onerous.


              For a trader such as myself who only place, at most, a few trades
          per day, such a journal is relatively easy to keep. Prop traders who make
          dozens of trades per day or more, however, are likely to find such a journal

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          102                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          to be onerous. One of the best ways to sabotage self-monitoring efforts is
          to make them so burdensome that you won’t sustain the effort. If you’re
          an active trader and cannot automate your monitoring of trades, you can
          streamline the journal in one of several ways:

            r You can create a single entry for the morning trading and a second
              entry for the afternoon’s trading, with the columns simply summariz-
              ing your positions, your P/L for the A . M . or P . M ., and your associated
              observations of your trading at those times.
            r You can create entries for selected positions only that stand out in
              your mind either because they were quite successful or quite unsuc-
              cessful. If you sample from your trades in this manner, make sure
              that you include best and worst trades, so that you can observe pos-
              itive and negative patterns. These are the trades from which we learn
              the most.
            r If your trading is complex, with many positions, hedges, and a flowing
              in and out of risk exposure over time (like a market maker or a very
              active portfolio manager), you can simply summarize your day with a
              single journal entry. The first column would review your major trading
              ideas, the second column would note P/L, and the third column would
              include your self-observations.


               There is no single self-monitoring format perfect for all traders; the
          key is to adapt the format to your needs and trading style. The real work
          comes when you’ve accumulated enough entries to notice patterns in your
          trading: the factors that distinguish your best trades and days and those
          that accompany your worst trading. How to analyze your self-monitoring
          journal will be the focus of the next lesson. For now, however, your task
          is simply to sustain self-awareness: to be an active observer of your own
          trading process.
               When you are your own trading coach, there is always a part of you that
          stands apart from your decision-making and execution, observing yourself
          and exercising control over what you do and how you do it. The real value
          of the trading journal is that it structures the process of self-awareness and
          helps make it more regular and automatic. If you were walking on a familiar
          street, you would hardly think about how you walk, everything would be
          on autopilot. If, however, you were taking the same walk in a minefield,
          you would be exquisitely self-aware, conscious of every step that you took.
          Trading is neither a walk in the park nor a minefield . . . perhaps it’s more
          like a walk in a beautiful, but somewhat dangerous park. You want to be
          absorbed in the walk, but alert and aware at the same time. That is the
          function of the trading journal: it enables you to monitor yourself, even as
          you are immersed in what you’re doing.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               103


                     COACHING CUE

          A great insight into journal keeping is oﬀered by Charles Kirk (www.
          thekirkreport.com) in Chapter 9, who enters his observations into a database
          program so that he can readily retrieve journal entries on various topics. This
          is an eﬀective way of monitoring speciﬁc trading challenges over time.




          LESSON 32: RECOGNIZE
          YOUR PATTERNS

          One of the keys to brief therapy is the creation of a concrete focus for
          change. One of the reasons that older forms of therapy took so long to
          implement—including years of psychoanalysis—was that they attempted
          broad personality changes. Our understanding of personality traits and
          their biological, hereditary components helps us to be a bit more modest in
          our aims. No form of coaching or counseling will restructure a person’s per-
          sonality; nor should it. The goal of coaching is to help people work around
          their weaknesses and build their strengths, so that they can express
          their basic personalities and skills as constructively and successfully as
          possible.

              You cannot change your personality, but you can change how it is
              expressed.

               Many self-described coaches lack formal training in psychology and es-
          pecially lack the experience and grounding of licensed helping profession-
          als. They acquire a cluster of self-help methods and try to fit all problems
          to those. The result is a canned set of solutions for any given problem. This
          can be disastrous. The patterns that interfere with trading often lie well out-
          side canned, self-help nostrums. One successful trader I recently met at a
          conference presentation was having a poor trading year and was even con-
          sidering retiring. She complained of a loss of enthusiasm and excitement
          about her trading, as well as weight gain and more negative feelings about
          herself. She had seen three prior coaches and therapists, all to no avail.
          After a short discussion, I obtained enough information to suggest that she
          obtain a blood workup from her primary care physician. She did so, and the
          results suggested a low level of thyroid activity. Once she received proper
          hormonal supplementation, her mood and energy level returned, her
          concentration improved, and she resumed her successful career.
               How many traders lose their careers because they never understand
          the patterns that underlie their problems?

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          104                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               You might ask the question, “How can I, as a trader relatively unedu-
          cated in applied psychology, ever hope to identify obscure patterns such
          as low hormone levels? If experienced coaches and counselors miss the
          pattern, how can I detect it?”
               Ironically, I think that you’re in better shape than most commercial
          coaches to identify and act upon unusual patterns that interfere with good
          trading. I could readily make the recommendation for the trader because
          I was not seeking her business. She was not paying me for my services
          and I did not stand to gain by making one recommendation versus an-
          other. (Note: my coaching is limited to a limited group of proprietary trad-
          ing firms, hedge funds, and investment banks; I don’t take on individual
          traders as clients.) Most coaches who focus on retail traders, on the other
          hand, need to constantly drum up business. It is not in their self-interest to
          raise a possible course of action (such as blood tests and thyroid medica-
          tion) that doesn’t lead to further services and additional fees. As a result,
          they focus on solutions that they can provide (i.e., that will bring them ad-
          ditional business). When all you have is a hammer, Maslow once remarked,
          you tend to treat everything as nails.
               As your own trading coach, you have no such conflicts of interest. You
          can learn pattern recognition for yourself and diagnose your own concerns.
          If the problem still eludes you, even after you’ve reviewed your journal
          extensively, send an e-mail to the special address reserved for this book
          (coachingself@aol.com; see the Conclusion) and I will do my best to point
          you in a promising direction. But I think you’ll be pleasantly surprised to
          find how readily you can tackle your own challenges once you learn a few
          basic techniques.

              Once you learn to coach yourself, you have the skills to guide your
              development across a lifetime.

              So let’s see how you can become expert in recognizing your own pat-
          terns, building on the trading journal described in the previous lesson. Re-
          viewing your journal entries, you want to divide them into two clusters:
          those describing your most successful trading and those that capture when
          you were trading at your worst. The first cluster will reveal what we call
          solution patterns; the second cluster alerts you to problem patterns. Many
          times, the difference between the solution and problem patterns will them-
          selves point you to practical actions you can take to improve your perfor-
          mance. For instance, you might notice that during your successful trad-
          ing you’re more patient entering trades and take fewer trades, each with
          smaller size. When you’re less successful, you trade more often and with
          maximum size.
              The comparison between best and worst trading will also alert you
          to differences in your coping with market challenges. You may find, for

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                             105


          example, that when you’re trading well, you tend to be very problem-
          focused. When you are less successful, you trade while you are confused or
          frustrated, without waiting for clearly defined opportunity.
               The key is to look for patterns, not just isolated instances of good or
          poor trading. For each good day of trading, you might jot down several
          things you did right and then see which entries appear day after day. Sim-
          ilarly, in reviewing the poor trading days, you would write down the key
          mistakes you made and observe which ones appear over time.

              Your trading strengths can be found in the patterns that repeat
              across successful trades.

               If you cannot find patterns that stand out, you may need to monitor
          your trading over a longer period, so that you have a rich sample of good
          and poor trading days. You’re looking for common elements that jump out
          at you; don’t be too quick to read subtleties into the patterns. The best
          things to work on are the ones that are most salient—that hit you between
          the eyes. For instance, when I have done the pattern-recognition work and
          compared my best and worst trading, I found stark differences in the sizing
          of my trades (initial positions neither too large nor too small performed
          best); the timing of the trades (positions too early in the morning or later
          in the afternoon underperformed those made after the market sorted itself
          out in the first minutes of trade); and the duration of my trades (better
          performance when held shorter, with clear targets and stops). I also found
          that I traded best when I had a clear longer-term picture of the market to
          guide shorter-term entries and trades. My absolute worst trading occurred
          when I held a strong view at the start of the market day and did not modify
          the view as the day progressed, continuing to trade against a market trend.
               Notice how each of these patterns focuses a trader on what to change,
          which is the first step in deciding how to make changes. Many times,
          traders fail to make changes because they aren’t clear on what to change.
          They rely on vague generalizations (“I need to be more disciplined”) rather
          than identify specific behaviors to work on. By conducting detailed com-
          parisons between your best and worst trading, you can find a focus for your
          self-coaching efforts and channel your energies in the most constructive
          directions. If you know your patterns—those that bring you success and
          failure—you’re generally halfway home in making lasting changes. Below
          are some patterns to be especially aware of as you review your journal:
            r Emotional Patterns—Distinct differences in how you feel when
              you’re trading well and when you’re trading poorly, particularly before
              and during trades.
            r Behavioral Patterns—Notable differences in how you prepare for
              trades and manage them during your best and worst trading episodes.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          106                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r Cognitive Patterns—Meaningful differences in your thought process
              and concentration level during and after your best and worst trades.
            r Physical Patterns—Differences in how you are feeling—your energy
              level, physical tension and relaxation, and posture—when you’re trad-
              ing at your best and worst.
            r Trading Patterns—Differences in the sizing of trades, times of day
              when you’re trading, mode of entering and exiting trades, and instru-
              ments being traded as a function of good versus poor trading.

                     COACHING CUE

          Many times you’ll observe more than one kind of pattern, and many times those
          patterns will be linked. For example, your cognitive patterns may lead to par-
          ticular emotional patterns, which are then linked to speciﬁc trading patterns.
          Think of patterns in sequence—as a kind of positive or negative cascade—not
          as either/or phenomena. Excellent coaches see not only patterns, but also pat-
          terns of patterns. Here are some of the most common patterns among traders
          to watch out for:
            r Placing impulsive, frustrated trades after losing ones.
            r Becoming risk-averse and failing to take good trades after a losing period.
            r Becoming overconﬁdent during a winning period and taking more marginal
              and/or unplanned trades.
            r Becoming anxious about performance and cutting winning trades short.
            r Oversizing trades to make up for prior losses.
            r Ignoring stop-loss levels to avoid taking losses.
            r Working on your trading when you’re losing money, but not when you’re
              making money.
            r Becoming caught up in the market action from moment to moment rather
              than actively managing a trade, preparing for a next trade, or managing a
              portfolio.
            r Beating yourself up after losing trades and losing your motivation for
              trading.
            r Trading for excitement and activity rather than to make money.
            r Taking trades because you’re afraid of missing a market move, rather than
              because of a favorable risk/reward proﬁle for your idea.



          LESSON 33: ESTABLISH COSTS
          AND BENEFITS TO PATTERNS

          A huge step forward for traders who seek to mentor themselves is to know
          the patterns of behavior, thought, and emotion associated with success-
          ful and unsuccessful trading. Still, it is necessary, but not sufficient to
          produce lasting change. This is because knowing a pattern is different

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               107


          from having—and sustaining—the motivation to alter that pattern. It is
          in the motivational arena that many of our change efforts, personal and
          professional, fall short. We need only to look at the dismal record of peo-
          ple’s attempts to diet, eat in healthy ways, or exercise regularly to see that
          knowing what you need to do and actually doing it are two different things.
               When you are your own trading coach, your challenge is to moti-
          vate change, just as a sports coach motivates a team to keep them work-
          ing hard and sustaining practice efforts. If keeping a journal and track-
          ing your patterns of good and bad trading is nothing more than a routine
          exercise—another item on a to-do list—it will not inspire motivation, and
          you will not sustain the efforts. Stoking the desire to make changes is dif-
          ficult, especially when trading is going reasonably well. “If it ain’t broke,
          don’t fix it,” is a formula for eventually lacking fixes when things do break.
               But there’s a more important reason for sustaining self-coaching ef-
          forts. When you’re trading well is precisely the time you want to be the
          most self-aware of your strengths, so that you can maximize your earn-
          ings at those times. The true competitors and most successful participants
          in sport, warfare, and games of skill such as chess are the ones who pos-
          sess the killer instinct: they have a sense for when they have the advantage,
          and they press that advantage to the hilt. Making modest money when you
          are trading well is a great way to ensure poor returns when you’re not see-
          ing markets as well. For many traders, it’s the relatively few, large gains
          from the best trading periods that contribute most to overall profitability.

              The measure of self-coaching is how hard you work on trading
              when you’re making money.

               It’s as important to work on yourself when you’re trading well as when
          you’re trading poorly. It’s not that you want to fix what isn’t broken; rather,
          you want to crystallize what you’re doing right so that you can do more of it
          and capitalize fully on it. Conversely, when you’re trading poorly, you don’t
          want to lapse into discouragement and defeat. Maintain the journal and the
          pattern recognition efforts to keep you in a constructive mode, even when
          all you may be able to do for the moment is to cut your risk when your
          negative patterns surface. That is still progress.
               So how do excellent traders (and competitors in any field) sustain the
          motivation to operate at elite levels of performance? An important driver
          of that motivation is an intense competitive drive and a ferocious desire
          to win. The traders I’ve worked with personally who have been consis-
          tent, high earners have traded quite differently and viewed markets in rad-
          ically different ways. Some traders have been loud and outgoing; others
          have been cerebral. Some have been uncannily intuitive; others have been
          analytically insightful. The common feature among all of them, however,
          has been their intense competitive nature. They compete against peers,

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          108                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          they compete against markets: most of all they compete against them-
          selves. They derive pride and validation, not just from making money, but
          also from getting better, which is what keeps successful traders in the game
          long after they could have retired comfortably.
              The lesser traders? They trade to not lose; they trade to keep their jobs.
          They don’t hunger to become more than they are; they want to do well, not
          to be their best.


              The drive for self-improvement is different from the desire to make
              money and is far more rare.

               These successful traders can sustain their drive by staying mindful of
          the costs of their negative patterns and the benefits of their positive ones.
          When a successful trader decides to avoid a particular trade or market,
          it’s often because of a specific recollection that this idea has caused past
          losses. By staying emotionally connected to the pain created by their worst
          trading, traders stoke their motivation to avoid trading mistakes. Similarly,
          knowing their strengths is not just an abstract awareness for successful
          traders, but an emotional connection to the pride and sense of accomplish-
          ment over doing well.
               A best practice in self-coaching—and a great assignment for this
          lesson—is to not only summarize the patterns of your best and worst
          trading, but to actually write down and visualize the costs associated
          with the most negative trading patterns and the benefits that accom-
          pany the best patterns. In other words, you don’t finish your journaling
          until you achieve a state in which you are emotionally connected to the
          things you are writing about. You will want to change your negative pat-
          terns when you get to the point of hating those patterns and becoming dis-
          gusted with the ways in which they’ve set you back. You’ll want to build on
          your positive patterns when you see and feel their benefits. When you’re
          coaching yourself well, journaling is an emotional exercise, not merely a
          cognitive one.
               There is little to be gained from abstract positive thinking. Reciting
          such affirmations as, “I will be a successful trader” is empty at best, self-
          delusional at worst. The reason such positive thinking doesn’t work is
          that it is not connected to the day-to-day conduct of your trading. It’s not
          enough to simply make yourself feel good, and, indeed, there can be real
          value in feeling so bad that you’ll never repeat a mistake again. What is
          helpful is to associate the best emotional experiences of trading—your
          greatest moments of joy and achievement—with the specific practices that
          brought you such happiness. It is also tremendously helpful to re-create the
          pain of your worst trading with concrete vows to never go there again.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               109

               Think of football, basketball, and tennis coaches. Every practice ses-
          sion teaches skills, offers feedback, and supplies motivation. It’s not a bad
          formula for self-coaching as well. You are most likely to change a nega-
          tive thought or behavior pattern when you associate it with concrete costs
          and consequences; you’re most likely to motivate a positive behavior by
          attaching to it specific, felt benefits.

                     COACHING CUE

          Eﬀorts at self-change break down when people start to make exceptions and al-
          low themselves to revert to old ways. To accept exceptions, you have to accept
          the old, negative patterns. It’s when our old patterns become thoroughly unac-
          ceptable that we are most likely to sustain change. When you keep a journal,
          you want to cultivate an attitude, not just jot down bloodless summaries of what
          you do. If you don’t see plenty of emotion words in your journal—constructively
          expressed—the odds are that your journal will summarize your changes but not
          motivate them.




          LESSON 34: SET EFFECTIVE GOALS

          Successful coaching requires a focus for change. Many self-help efforts
          among traders fail because they are unfocused. One day the trader writes
          in a journal about position sizing and works on that; the next day he
          emphasizes emotional control; and the following day he stresses taking
          losses quicker. By jumping from one focus to another, no single direction is
          sustained.
              This is problematic because most learning does not occur all at once.
          We know from research that learning typically requires many trials and
          considerable feedback. If we think about important skills that we’ve
          learned—from using a computer to driving a car—we can see that trial and
          error has been the norm. I can study a map of a new city for a long time
          and learn quite a bit, but I ultimately only learn to find my way around by
          driving on various roads, following signs, getting lost, and recognizing land-
          marks. If we pursue this learning intentionally—organizing our trials over
          a concentrated period of time with immediate feedback throughout—we
          can greatly shorten our learning curves. It’s easier to learn to play a piano
          by practicing every day and taking lessons every week than by engaging in
          occasional efforts spread over years.

              The training of an Olympic athlete is a study in proper skill
              development: intensive work on specific aspects of performance,

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          110                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              accompanied by plenty of coaching feedback and corrective
              efforts.

               When we lack a specific focus for change and jump from one trad-
          ing goal to another from day to day, we don’t really enter a learning
          curve: there is nothing cumulative in our efforts. As your own coach, you
          need to establish—and also sustain—a specific direction to guide your
          growth and development. This is the key to effective goal setting. If moti-
          vation provides the energy for self-improvement, goals supply the aim, the
          channeling of that energy.
               When you recognize a problem pattern, it is not the same as estab-
          lishing a goal for self-work, though the former usually will guide the lat-
          ter. A problem pattern alerts you to what you’re doing wrong. Goal setting
          requires an awareness of new patterns of thought, feeling, and/or action
          that will replace the problem pattern. A goal states what you are going
          to do or not do in specific situations. If you have constructed your trading
          journal and pattern-identification exercises in the ways suggested in recent
          lessons, many of your goals will naturally follow from the patterns associ-
          ated with your best trading. Your overarching goal will be to trade in the
          way that you typically trade when you’re trading well.
               Notice that I am defining goals in a process sense, rather than as ab-
          solute outcomes. This is very important. Many traders think of such goals
          as making a million dollars or being able to trade for a living. These out-
          come goals may be motivating, and definitely have their place, but they do
          not focus a trader on what she needs to do today and tomorrow to become
          better. Traders on a short time frame do not have full control over their
          outcomes: a trader can make good decisions, placing all odds in their fa-
          vor, only to lose money when markets behave in an anomalous fashion.
          What traders can control is the process of trading: how they make and
          implement decisions. The most effective daily goals emphasize trading
          well, not making oodles of money.
               The same logic guides athletic coaches. A coach may stress the goal of
          victory over the next opponent, but the day-to-day practices will emphasize
          such fundamentals as swinging at good pitches (baseball), making the ex-
          tra pass (basketball), and blocking effectively on running plays (football).
          These process goals provide the ongoing focus for practice over time and
          ensure that coaching leads to effective learning. Every coach is, at root, a
          teacher. When you’re your own coach, you guide your own learning efforts.

              Effective goals target effective trading practices that break trading
              down to component skills and then set targets for these, one at a
              time.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               111

               As you examine your journal entries for the patterns that distinguish
          your best and worst trading, the question you want to ask is, “What is the
          difference that will make the greatest difference in my trading?” Stated
          otherwise, your question is, “What are the one or two ways I can trade
          more like my best trading and less like my worst trading?” The answer to
          these questions will form the basis for your best process goals—and will
          guide your self-development efforts from day to day and week to week.
          Goals should not be so specific that they only apply to a limited set of cir-
          cumstances (“I want to be a market buyer when put/call ratios hit 100-day
          highs”), and they should not be so broad or vague that they don’t guide
          concrete actions (“I want to trade less often”). The best goals are ones you
          can work on every day for a number of weeks. If you do not work on a
          goal day after day for at least several weeks, it’s unlikely that you will turn
          your new patterns into positive habits.
               As mentioned earlier, you don’t want to focus on too many goals at
          once. I’ve generally found three to be as many as I can work on with con-
          sistent intensity—and many times I will focus on fewer objectives. This
          means that a good self-coach will prioritize needed changes, emphasizing
          those differences that will most make a difference. A great exercise to try is
          to close your eyes and imagine yourself as a great trader. Visualize yourself
          as the best trader you can possibly be—or maybe visualize an absolutely
          perfect trading day. What are you doing differently from your usual trading
          when you’re the great trader? How is your trading different on the perfect
          day than on poor one? In your visualizations, try seeing yourself doing all
          the right things when you’re trading well. What are you doing? How are you
          doing it? Those visions, made highly specific, will form the backbones of
          your goals.


                     COACHING CUE

          Make it a point to get to know successful traders who have had plenty of market
          experience. Many times you can form eﬀective goals by simply trying to emulate
          their best trading qualities.




          LESSON 35: BUILD ON YOUR BEST:
          MAINTAIN A SOLUTION FOCUS

          To this point, the lessons in this chapter have emphasized the im-
          portance of tracking the patterns associated with both your trading
          shortcomings and your trading successes. It is common to focus on the

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          112                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          former only. When we use coaching to build strengths rather than simply
          shoring up weaknesses, that solution focus produces surprising—and sur-
          prisingly rapid—results.

              For more on the solution-focused approach to change, check out
              The Psychology of Trading

             There are several reasons why a solution focus is helpful for traders
          who seek to coach themselves:
            r Motivation—It is easier to stay motivated and optimistic when we
              emphasize what we’re doing right, not just where we fall short. Imagine
              a sports coach who only harped on players’ weaknesses. Over time,
              that would be demoralizing. When the focus is strengths, coaching can
              be empowering and inspiring without ignoring changes that need to be
              made or the urgency of making those changes.
            r Goal Setting—Knowing what you’ve done wrong, in and of itself, does
              not tell you what you need to do right. When you focus on your best
              trading, you can identify specific patterns that are associated with your
              success and turn these into concrete goals for future work.
            r Bang for the Buck—Working solely on improving weak areas is un-
              likely to create strengths; at best, you’ll take a deficient area and bring
              it to average. It’s making the most of strengths and learning how to
              work around shortcomings that produces optimal performance results.
               One of the reasons I emphasize the importance of paper (simulation)
          trading and playing with different trading styles and markets is that this
          experience enables you to observe your own strengths firsthand. Many,
          many times, traders stumble across their performance niches when they
          discover something they’re good at. If you don’t know your strengths, it’s
          unlikely that you’ll be able to systematically build on them and turn them
          into drivers of elite performance.
               But you might wonder, “How do I stay solution focused if, day after
          day, I’m in a slump and losing money?” It is difficult to stay connected to
          our strengths when our failings are written all over our P/L summaries!
               We’ve seen that this question is a particular challenge when we
          identify winning days as good trading and losing days as bad trading. This
          thinking makes it difficult to observe and appreciate good trading when
          we’re not making money. But traders can trade well—they can take setups
          with demonstrated edges, size positions well, and manage the risk of their
          trades—even if trades happen to go against them. After all, even a 60 to
          40 edge per trade ensures that a trader, over time, will have sequences of
          consecutive losing trades and/or days. If you define good and bad trading
          in terms of process, not just outcome, you can observe strengths during

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                             113


          performance slumps and also you can detect flaws even when you’re
          making money.
               To keep yourself solution-focused, you want to ask yourself, “What
          did I do well today? What about this trade did I do right?” You’ll find that,
          over time, your performance is varied. Not all trades are poorly conceived,
          poorly executed losers. If you lost less today than the past several days,
          what did you do better? If you had a number of winning trades during sev-
          eral losing days, what distinguished those winners? Focus on the improve-
          ments in your trading and then isolate the specific actions you took to gen-
          erate those improvements. These actions can be meaningful additions to a
          daily to-do list.

              “What did I do better this week than last week?” is a great starting
              point for guiding next week’s efforts. Do more of what works—it’s
              the essence of the solution focus.

               Another technique for sustaining the solution focus referenced at the
          end of the last lesson is to identify a mentor or trader you respect and
          ask yourself how he would be trading a particular idea. Sometimes it is
          very helpful to try out solution patterns that you borrow from others. Over
          time, you adapt these patterns to your own ways of thinking and trading,
          so that they become distinctly yours. For example, I’ve worked with quite
          a few hedge fund portfolio managers and have learned from them the im-
          portance of thinking thematically about markets: observing various sectors
          and asset classes and creating narratives that guide a longer-term perspec-
          tive. The specific themes I track and the time frames I monitor are com-
          pletely different from theirs, but there is a similarity of process. When I’m
          not trading well, I can model their processes and place myself more in line
          with market’s trends.
               Still another way to keep the solution focus is to make special note of
          mistakes that you don’t make in your trading. These notes represent excep-
          tions to problem patterns. If there’s a mistake you’ve made lately, it helps
          to hone in on occasions when you haven’t made the mistake. What are you
          doing differently at those times to avoid the mistake? Perhaps you’re an-
          ticipating the problem and consciously doing something different. Maybe
          you’re avoiding the mistake by following a particular rule or practice. What-
          ever helps you do less of the wrong things can also form the basis for
          solutions.

              Look to situations in which you don’t make your worst mistakes.
              Many times those situations hold the key to avoiding problem
              patterns more consistently.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          114                                                      THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               The real power of the solution focus is that, when you discover what
          you do during your best trading, those positive patterns are uniquely yours.
          Instead of ceding the role of expert and guru to others, you’re turning your-
          self into your own guru by finding the best practices that are unique to you.
          You become your own role model. This is one of the most promising facets
          of self-coaching: by discovering who you are at your best, you can create
          goals that are specific, unique, and relevant to you. The learning, as a result,
          will be more relevant and empowering, reinforcing strengths as you build
          them.
               A great assignment is to review your trading journal and assess the ra-
          tio of problem entries (writings about your bad trading) to solution entries
          (writings about what you’re doing best). If the ratio is lopsided in favor of
          the problem focus, consider structuring your writing to force yourself to
          address a few basic questions:
            r What, specifically, am I doing best in my recent trading?
            r How, specifically, am I avoiding old trading mistakes when I’m trading
              well?
            r How, specifically, am I trading like my idea of the ideal trader during
              my best trading?

              A good sports coach never loses sight of a player’s potential, even when
          correcting weaknesses. The challenge of self-coaching is never losing sight
          of your strengths, and then working daily on how you can maximize them.

                      COACHING CUE

          We have solution markets as well as solution patterns of behavior: speciﬁc mar-
          kets and market conditions that facilitate our most successful trading. Knowing
          these intimately is very helpful in allocating risk to your trade ideas. It can also
          be helpful in staying out of certain kinds of trades and emphasizing others.



          LESSON 36: DISRUPT OLD
          PROBLEM PATTERNS

          As you continue your journaling over a period of weeks or longer, you
          will become attuned to your problem patterns. Usually, a trader does
          not have 10 different problems. Rather, he may have one or two prob-
          lems that manifest themselves in 10 different ways. For instance, a trader
          may grapple with missing good trades, occasionally ignoring stop-loss lev-
          els, sizing positions too conservatively, and cutting winning trades too
          quickly. These examples may seem like different problems, each requiring
          a different coaching plan and process. As the trader examines his or her

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               115


          journals, however, they’re likely to find that a single problem pattern—
          anxiety related to negative self-talk—is responsible for all of these. It’s not
          that the trader has many problems (though it may certainly feel that
          way); it’s that there is a single, core problem that affects many aspects of
          the trading process.
               As you can see from the above example, self-coaching requires that
          you not only detect patterns but patterns among the patterns. It’s these
          patterns of patterns that usually form the core focus of coaching efforts.
          This means that if you can accurately identify the core pattern, many dif-
          ferent trading difficulties can fall into place in a reasonable period of time.
          Once the trader in our example learns to master anxiety and not channel
          it through self-defeating self-talk, he will miss far fewer opportunities, be-
          come more consistent in sticking to stop-loss levels, take appropriate risk,
          and let trades progress toward their designated targets.


              Asking yourself, “What is the common denominator behind my dif-
              ferent trading mistakes?” begins the process of finding patterns of
              patterns.

               Often the core pattern will involve a feeling state that recurs for the
          trader and that disrupts good decision-making. For example, the trader
          may lapse into periods of anxiety, frustration, or self-defeat. How this feel-
          ing state impacts trading may vary from day to day, which is what produces
          the multiple manifestations that lead traders to think that they have dozens
          of problems. By tracing each trading problem back to a particular cognitive
          (thinking) or emotional (feeling) state, we can then identify the events that
          typically trigger that state and design effective coaching interventions to
          tackle those situations and triggers.
               Often, a trader will know what he is doing wrong, but won’t know
          the right thing to do. This issue occurs when traders have not been suffi-
          ciently solution-focused. They know, for instance, that they should not dou-
          ble down on losing trades to make money back, but they don’t know how
          to reenter a trade and exploit good research after having been stopped out
          of an initial position. This situation requires two important coaching steps:
          1) interrupt the problem pattern so that it does not disrupt trading; and
          2) develop rules and procedures for a possible solution pattern (which will
          form the theme of the next lesson).
               Because traders don’t always have solutions readily at hand and need
          to stop bleeding losses, interrupting problem patterns is often a first
          coaching objective. “Above all else, do no harm”—the Socratic oath in
          medicine—is relevant here. The ability to stop doing wrong things won’t,
          by itself, generate good things, but it can keep you solvent long enough to
          find solutions!

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          116                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              Change starts when you stop yourself from doing what doesn’t
              work.

               A major point from The Psychology of Trading is that the key to dis-
          rupting problem patterns is to alter the state that you’re in when those
          problems first appear. This means that it’s important to become vigilant
          to the emergence of patterns, recognizing the characteristic ways that they
          appear. For example, some of my worst trading occurs when I focus on
          my P/L as the trade is unfolding. This focus may lead me to tolerate larger
          than normal losses in a small position, because it’s not hurting me, or it
          may lead me to take profits too quickly on a large position to book a sure
          gain. I’ve learned that if I start counting profits during the trade, I need to
          refocus my attention. I accomplish this by turning briefly from the screen,
          fixing my gaze on something nearby, and taking a few deep breaths. Once
          I’m in a new state—more calm and focused—I find it easier to be detached
          from the P/L and let the trade unfold in its planned manner.
               Another quick way of shifting state is simply to walk away from the
          screen temporarily and engage in a quick activity unrelated to trading.
          Some activities might be a few stretches or exercises; talking with a fel-
          low trader; or getting something to eat or drink. Often, doing something
          different enables you to approach situations differently: the new activity
          helps you shift your frame of thinking and feeling. I find this activity partic-
          ularly useful after taking losses: a quick walk outdoors, getting away from
          markets, allows me to return to the screen with a fresh perspective.

              When you change your physical state, you alter how you experi-
              ence the world and process information.

              Still another mode of state shifting is to write in a journal or talk aloud
          during a particular situation. The latter is especially useful if you’re trad-
          ing alone and won’t be a distraction to others if you process information
          aloud. If you write or talk about what is happening and give voice to what
          you think and feel at the time you’re thinking and feeling it, you shift from
          being a person immersed in experience to being a person observing his
          own experience. If you’re an active trader, in and out of markets quickly,
          you may not have time to write out journal entries and observe yourself
          in that manner. Talking aloud, however, can be accomplished while still
          watching the screen; in fact, that’s how many traders in Chicago work with
          me during the trading day: they talk aloud about what is happening while
          they are engaged in trading.
              To use my example from above, if I talk aloud my thoughts about my
          P/L while I’m in a trade, that alerts me to the fact that I’m no longer focused

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                 117

          on the trade itself. If I hear myself talk about something other than the
          management of the present trade, it kicks me into a different mode and
          pushes me to make an effort to get back to the market itself. This shift
          becomes easier and easier as traders learn to make self-observation a habit.


              When you talk aloud your thoughts and feelings, you no longer
              identify with them; you listen to them as an observer.


               A good self-coaching question to ask yourself is: How different would
          your P/L be if you could eliminate the 5 percent of your largest losing
          trades? Often, this percent by itself would make a huge difference to a
          trader’s profitability. By interrupting the patterns that accompany those
          large losers that result from bad trading (not just being wrong on an
          idea), you can “above all else, do no harm.” It’s usually a particular emo-
          tional state or pathway of thinking that triggers the bad trading. If you
          recognize the state and thoughts as they’re occurring, you can stop yourself
          and, at the very least, avoid disaster.
               This recognition would make a wonderful goal to work on in your trad-
          ing. Choose just one negative pattern that has accounted for many of your
          largest losing trades and then identify the common triggers for that pat-
          tern. Then select one method for interrupting the pattern when you no-
          tice one of the triggers occurring—even if that method is doing nothing
          more than placing no more trades until you regain emotional equilibrium.
          A good coach knows when to take his player out of the game for rest and
          a lesson. When you are your own trading coach, sometimes you need to do
          something similar. Remember: the goal is not to trade; the goal is to make
          money. Sometimes the best way to make money over the long haul is to
          ensure that you keep your money when all the wrong patterns are firing.


                      COACHING CUE

          If I say something in a frustrated tone or make a frustrated gesture while I’m
          trying to get into a trade, while I’m managing a trade that’s already on, or while
          I’m trying to exit, that is my signal that I need to interrupt an emerging pattern.
          I typically will slow my breathing considerably and focus on my breathing as I’m
          continuing with my business. As soon as is practical thereafter, I take a short
          break from the screen and don’t enter any new positions until I have ﬁgured out
          why I’m frustrated, what that tells me (about me and/or the market), and how I
          want to factor that into my trading. If you use frustration as a cue to interrupt
          patterns you are prevented from acting mindlessly on the frustration, but also
          you are set up to become mindful of the reasons for the frustration.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          118                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 37: BUILD YOUR CONSISTENCY
          BY BECOMING RULE-GOVERNED

          One of the major goals of coaching yourself is to turn positive trading be-
          haviors into habit patterns. This is crucially important. You don’t want to
          have to think and make yourself do the right things each time opportunity
          occurs. Rather, you want to do the right things automatically. Effort and
          energy you spend thinking about what to do—and trying to make yourself
          do it—is taken away from markets themselves. When you can do the right
          things automatically, your concentration can be wholly focused on what
          you are doing. That is essential if you’re going to be sensitive to subtle
          market shifts in supply and demand.
               Rules are the bridge between new behavior patterns and acquired
          habits. Children are not born with a developed sense of ethics and respon-
          sibility. They are taught rules by parents and teachers that are eventually
          internalized. Some of that internalization occurs by observing role mod-
          els over time; much of it results from turning the desired behaviors into
          explicit rules that can be rehearsed. Such mental rehearsal allows peo-
          ple to keep old behavior patterns in check and make conscious efforts to
          engage in new ones.
               We see such dynamics at work when traders are learning to control
          losses. Instead of exiting trades when the pain of loss is too great—a
          pattern that comes all too naturally—a trader will create a rule-based stop-
          loss level. The rule may be accompanied by other thoughts that emphasize
          the importance of the rule, the losses that will follow from not following
          the rule, and the benefits of adhering to the rule. In such an instance,
          traders choose to refuse to do what they feel like doing at the moment.
          Rather, they seek to be rule-governed. That is what keeps us driving on the
          proper side of the road, even when we’re in a rush. Rules are checks on our
          impulses; they keep us doing the right things even when we’re not inclined
          to act in our own best interests or the interests of others.

              We follow social rules without even thinking about the rules of
              proper social behavior because we’ve repeated the right behaviors
              so often and have internalized the rules so thoroughly over time.
              That’s the goal with trading rules.

               Trading is especially challenging, because the normal human response
          is rarely the one that makes money. One exercise from the TraderFeed
          blog examined periods of time that were up on a one-month, one-week,
          and one-day basis and compared those with periods that were down over
          those three time frames. In the first situation, almost anyone would identify

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                 119


          the trend as rising; in the second situation, it’s a clear downtrend. Had you
          bought the market after the up periods, however, you would have severely
          underperformed the market averages. Had you sold after the down peri-
          ods, you would have lost considerable money. The obvious strategy fails
          precisely because it is so obvious. By the time a trend is readily appar-
          ent; all the momentum and trend followers are aboard. They’re the ones
          scrambling to get out when the tide turns, leaving traders who acted on the
          obvious with losses.
               When we create rules, we put a brake on those normal human ten-
          dencies. A rule might be as simple as “only buy if the market is down over
          X period.” Surprisingly, in the broad stock market, such a simple rule works
          pretty well on average. Another rule might be, “Never enter a trade unless
          you first measure risk (stop-loss level) and reward (profit target) and have
          a reward-to-risk ratio of 2:1 or better.” Such a rule would restrain a trader
          who is tempted to jump aboard late in a market move.
               What traders call setup criteria often are simply rules for getting them
          into trades. When the criteria are not established as firm rules—and men-
          tally rehearsed as such—there is a tendency to violate the setups. This vi-
          olation often occurs because of the fear of missing a profit opportunity or
          because of risk aversion after a prior loss or series of losses. When the
          setups are structured as rules, trading may not be mechanical, but it can be
          much more consistent. Most frequently, the inconsistent trader is the one
          with the loosest rules.


              Rules aid trading consistency.

               When you are your own trading coach, you not only formulate your
          rules, but also must do so in a way as to maximize the odds that you will
          actually follow them. The key to successful rule-creation is the recognition
          that rules are more than thoughts that go into your head. A good rule also
          comes with feelings attached: an awareness of both the consequences of
          violating the rule and the benefits of following it. What keeps a diabetic per-
          son faithful to a diet or an eager child patiently waiting her turn to answer
          a question in class? It’s not just the thought of the rule, but also the imme-
          diate sense of what would happen if the rule were violated. When people
          think, “I can get away with it,” the rule loses its force: it’s merely a set of
          empty words and good intentions.
               This, then, is the secret to formulating trading rules, whether they re-
          late to entries, exit, position sizing, stop-losses, diversification, or idea gen-
          eration: whenever you write down the rule or mentally rehearse it, make
          sure that you are emotionally connected to that rule. Make yourself re-
          live situations in which you’ve violated the rule. Focus your attention on

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          120                                                      THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          successful episodes of trading in which you followed the rule. Make the
          rule more than a guideline; it should represent a belief and conviction. The
          best rules feel like must, not just should.
              Your assignment is to take a thorough trading inventory of your trading
          rules. How many do you really have, and how explicit are they? Do you just
          remind yourself of them passively, or do you rehearse them with belief and
          conviction? If you’re like most traders, you’ll find that you have many loose
          guidelines, but few firm rules. That means that you haven’t really drilled
          down to identify the patterns behind your best and worst trading, which
          really form the backbone of all good rules.

              Rules should reflect best practices in trading.

              Remember: you can’t follow a discipline that you never formulated
          in the first place. The clearer the rules and the more you feel them, the
          stronger they will serve as brakes to your impulses and guides to your best
          behavior. Rules are not straightjackets; they free you up to be your best.
          Think of professions in which consistency is a virtue: airline pilots land-
          ing an aircraft, surgeons making incisions, racecar drivers maneuvering in
          a pack. The best performers are rule governed: they are keenly aware of
          the dangers of ignoring the rules of their profession. It is in the internaliza-
          tion of their rules that they achieve flawless execution. That is your goal in
          coaching yourself: to make rules so routine that they make extraordinary
          performance the norm.

                      COACHING CUE

          Rule-following is a great basis for self-evaluation. Creating checklist report
          cards to track your rule governance helps ground you day to day in best prac-
          tices. Among the rules you should consider formulating and tracking for self-
          assessment are:
            r Rules for position sizing.
            r Rules for limiting losses, per trade, per day, per week, etc.
            r Rules for adding to existing positions.
            r Rules for when you stop trading or limit your size/risk.
            r Rules for increasing your size/risk, per trade, per day, etc.
            r Rules for entering and exiting positions.
            r Rules for preparing for the trading day/week.
            r Rules for diversiﬁcation among positions.
               Not all these rules will apply to all traders; the key is to focus on the rules
          that capture your best trading and turn those into report cards for daily/weekly
          self-assessment and goal setting.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2     Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                               121


          LESSON 38: RELAPSE AND REPETITION

          The greatest enemy of coaching is relapse. It is relatively easy to initiate
          change, but quite difficult to sustain it. Our old patterns are what come
          naturally: they’re what we’ve been doing day after day, year after year.
          Those patterns are overlearned; they have been repeated so often that they
          have become automatic. If change efforts are not sustained, the automatic
          patterns naturally fill the void.
              What this means in practice is that there is a certain series of stages to
          any change process:

              Phase One—We repeat old patterns automatically, experience conse-
              quences, and try to avoid the consequences as much as possible.
              Phase Two—Consequences of old patterns accumulate and we de-
              velop an awareness of the need to change, though we may not know
              how to change and may have ambivalent feelings about change.
              Phase Three—We can no longer accept the negative consequences
              of our old ways and commit ourselves to making changes by trying to
              think and act differently.
              Phase Four—We slide back into old patterns periodically when our
              change efforts lose momentum, creating oscillating periods of change
              and relapse.
              Phase Five—We engage in new patterns sufficiently often that they
              become automatic, greatly reducing the relapse into old ways.

               So let’s take a practical example: In phase one, we are in an unfulfilling
          romantic relationship, but minimize the problems and try to go on from
          day to day. In phase two, we recognize that the problems are there, but
          wrestle with the question of whether we really want to rock the boat and
          raise concerns with our partner. Phase three brings clear awareness of the
          need for change and discussions at home to work out problems. Phase four
          sees periods of good times, interrupted by resumptions of the problematic
          interactions, perhaps aided by couples counseling. In phase five, we keep
          working on the counseling exercises, changing patterns of communication,
          until there are new and more constructive ways of engaging each other that
          have become routine.
               This step-wise scheme suggests that relapse is not merely a problem,
          it is a step on the road to change. Few people change patterns all at once
          and for all time. More often, there is a tug-of-war between the old, over-
          learned patterns and the new, constructive ones we’re working on. This
          tug-of-war occurs precisely because the new patterns have not yet been
          overlearned: it takes conscious effort to enact them. Early in the change
          process, we don’t think about change; in the middle phases, we have to

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          122                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          think about change in a very conscious manner. Only late in the process do
          the new behaviors come more naturally and automatically.


              In every change process, there is an intermediate phase in which
              old problem patterns coexist with new, positive ones. Relapse at
              this stage is the norm—not necessarily a sign of failure.


               So what enables us to make the transition from effortful change to an
          internalization of new patterns so thorough that those patterns become
          second nature? If you think back to when you learned to drive a car, there
          was a period when you had to consciously focus on every aspect of driv-
          ing, from signaling and making turns to changing lanes. Only with repeated
          experience did these activities become automatic, freeing you up to fo-
          cus on road conditions when necessary, converse with passengers, and lo-
          cate unfamiliar destinations. Similarly, repeated experience with new cog-
          nitive, emotional, and behavioral patterns in trading is what cements these
          patterns and frees you up to focus on markets. Relapse is overcome
          through repetition.


              Only when new behaviors have been repeated many times, in many
              contexts, do they begin to become automatic, overcoming the ten-
              dency to relapse.


               We saw in the lesson dealing with goal setting that, as your own trading
          coach, you don’t want to set a goal one day, another goal the next day,
          and still a different one later that week. This is a common flaw with many
          trading journals. Traders take steps to initiate change—phases three and
          four above—but fail to cement the changes through repeated experience.
          It is far better to focus on one or two changes and institute those with
          regularity over a period of weeks and months than to try to make many
          changes in a short period of time.
               Your assignment, following the discussion of rules from the previous
          chapter, is to review your current trading goals and assess how well you
          sustain work on them day after day. Ideally your goals—and the changes
          you attempt to make—should be expressed in such a manner that you will
          necessarily have to work on them each and every trading day. One way to
          foster this consistency is to generate a daily report card, in which you grade
          yourself on your enactment of the behaviors you try to cultivate. The goal
          is to achieve good grades each day, not just hit your targets on a particular
          occasion.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                 123


               Similarly, if you are writing about your goal performance each day,
          the mere act of thinking about your new behaviors and evaluating them
          will serve as a kind of repetition. You’re much more likely to stick with
          new behaviors if they command top-of-the mind awareness. Talk about the
          changes you’re making, write about them, grade yourself daily on them
          and—most of all—enact them during each day’s trade. As with the driving,
          before too long you’ll find yourself doing the right things automatically. At
          that point, you don’t need motivation; you’ve turned goals into habits.

                      COACHING CUE

          Engage in an important goal-oriented pattern as your ﬁrst activity of the day to
          build momentum for a purposeful day. I’ve worked with traders who stuck with
          their trading goals much better after they began programs of physical ﬁtness.
          Their ﬁtness work forced them to be goal-oriented to start their day, which
          carried over into their trading. You’re not just training yourself to trade better;
          you’re training yourself to sustain change eﬀorts across all facets of life.




          LESSON 39: CREATE A SAFE
          ENVIRONMENT FOR CHANGE

          In the last lesson, we took a look at the importance of repetition in cement-
          ing new patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving. The single most com-
          mon reason why skilled traders fail to coach themselves to higher levels
          of performance is that they initiate changes, but fail to sustain them. As
          soon as they make improvements, they relax their efforts and fall back into
          old ways. A successful coach knows when the opponent is on the ropes
          and doesn’t let up. When you have a positive experience, you want it to be
          a motivation for further positive experiences, not a cue for complacence.
          The best coaching efforts develop a kind of momentum in that way, adding
          success to success and sustaining a sense of mastery and accomplishment.
               The problem with experience is that it takes time. Particularly if you’re
          a longer-time-frame trader, many weeks or months of trading may pass be-
          fore you have the opportunity to build a large base of new experience. If
          only you could multiply your experience, you could accelerate your learn-
          ing curve. Changes that would otherwise take months could be accom-
          plished in a few weeks.
               The way that coaches in sports and the performing arts multiply
          experience is through repeated practice. A team might only play oppo-
          nents on the weekend, but will practice every day to prepare for the games.
          Similarly, actors and actresses will rehearse their lines every day before

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          124                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          opening the curtains for the actual production. During those practice ses-
          sions, performers condense the coaching process: they learn what they’re
          doing right and wrong, make conscious efforts to repeat their positive per-
          formances and correct their faulty ones, and eventually reach the point
          where their efforts become natural and automatic. Practice is valuable, be-
          cause it creates a safe environment for making mistakes. The game won’t
          be on the line or the play won’t be ruined if a performer tries something
          new and it falls flat in practice.


              Rehearsal speeds the learning curve.


              Practice can be very helpful to your efforts to coach yourself. If you
          identify a specific change to make, the place to begin is in simulated trading
          where no capital is at risk. This can occur in several different ways:

            r Simple Chart Review—Sometimes the changes you make to your
              trading involve decisions regarding how you would enter, exit, or man-
              age risk. When those are your goals, you can review charts and simply
              talk aloud the decisions you’d be making at each juncture. This lacks
              the realism of real-time trading (and cannot substitute for real-life ex-
              perience), but it does slow the decision-making process down to the
              point where you can try new things in a very conscious, reflective man-
              ner. My favorite way of engaging in the chart review is to advance the
              chart on my screen one bar at a time and then talk aloud my percep-
              tions and decisions. This is like first learning to drive a car by driving
              very slowly in a large, empty parking lot. It gives the learner plenty of
              time to crawl before walking and running.
            r Simulated Trading—My charting software comes with a simulation
              feature in which I can place orders and track my profits and losses over
              time. This is helpful because you’re making decisions with real market
              data in real time, but placing no capital at risk. By trading in simulation
              mode, you can gain many days’ worth of experience in a single day. You
              can also focus your attention on the most problematic and challenging
              market occasions, concentrating your skill rehearsal in contexts that
              most call for your new patterns.
            r Trading with Reduced Size—Not all of the changes I seek in my own
              trading are revolutionary. Some are evolutionary tweaks. Recently I
              altered the criteria by which I set profit targets, allowing me to hold
              certain trades for a bit longer. I reduced my trading size in half when I
              traded with the new criteria, knowing that the extended holding times
              would, by themselves, be uncomfortable for me. Once I developed a
              comfort level with the lowered size—and made my mistakes with the

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                              125

              smaller risk exposure—I then gradually returned to my prior level of
              risk.


              Learning is best started in very safe environments and only later
              tackled in riskier situations. If you violate safety and security, you
              create distractions that interfere with learning.


               Note that if I were to make radical changes in my trading—say, switch
          from trading equity indexes to trading agricultural commodities—I would
          need an extensive period of time with chart review and simulation prior
          to putting any capital at risk. Those more substantial changes take longer
          to internalize; there is a more extensive learning curve. On average, we’ll
          make more mistakes when we attempt large changes rather than small
          tweaks. When you are your own coach, you provide more security and
          safety for big change efforts; the smaller pattern shifts can proceed with
          live trading and reduced risk exposure.
               One of the greatest mistakes traders make is to make a change once
          or twice and then jump immediately into larger risk-taking, giddy with
          the prospects of new returns from new habits. It is not unusual in my
          coaching and trading experience for trading results to get worse before
          they get better when tackling meaningful changes in trading practice. Just
          as you wouldn’t learn how to use the car’s brakes and gearshift in a couple
          lessons and then jump into highway driving, you don’t want to greatly alter
          your decision-making process while running full risk. As the Enhancing
          Trader Performance book stresses, the worst psychological mistake you
          can make is to traumatize yourself. If you create large drawdowns in your
          account because you weren’t prepared for your changes, the result will
          be damaging to both your trading performance and to your self-coaching.
          You want to structure the change process as much as possible to provide
          frequent successes and no emotionally damaging losses. This is how you
          sustain confidence and self-efficacy, even as you make your mistakes.
               Many traders are too eager to trade. They crave excitement and prof-
          its and find it difficult to trade in observation, simulation, and reduced
          risk modes. This short-circuits the process of generating repetitions that
          cement new patterns. Once traders undergo losses while making changes,
          they become self-doubting and pull back from their change efforts. Instead
          of generating success and confidence, traders learn to fear change. An
          important key to coaching yourself is to turn yourself into a generator of
          concentrated experience by making maximum use of practice and feed-
          back. We often seek change after periods of loss; it’s human nature to want
          to jump back into markets and regain the lost capital. But the goal is to
          instill the right trading behaviors, not to make money back all at once. If
          you internalize the right patterns, the results will naturally follow.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          126                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Your assignment is to embed concentrated learning into your sched-
          ule by allocating time for daily rehearsal of new skills and patterns. An
          excellent goal is to generate two day’s worth of learning experience into
          every day by rehearsing new patterns outside of trading hours as well
          as during them. Replay market days, either in video mode or through a
          simulation platform that has a replay feature, to accomplish this goal.
               I know from the traffic statistics on my blog and others that traders
          spend less time gathering market information after the close of trading and
          especially during weekends and holidays. Traders use the hours outside of
          trading to get away from markets. No one argues with the need for and de-
          sirability of life balance, but a nine-to-five approach will work no better in
          trading than it would in running a business or building a career as an artist,
          scientist, or athlete. When you read about elite performers in any field, one
          fact stands out: they are not the clock punchers. They are absorbed in their
          interests and, as a result, learn far more than others. They develop new
          skills and competencies far more readily than their peers simply because
          they multiply experience.

              Many traders back away from the screen when they have trad-
              ing problems, thereby reducing their experience. During the worst
              drawdowns, you want to minimize your trading and risk exposure,
              but maximize your work on markets.

               When you create safe environments for changing yourself and your
          trading, you mimic the learning behaviors of the greats, from concert
          pianists to chess champions to Olympic athletes. When you start with prac-
          tice that encourages errors and learning from them, development becomes
          a joy, not a burden. This is self-coaching at its finest.


                     COACHING CUE

          The video recording of markets for later review is an excellent way to multiply
          experience. Replaying the market day allows you to watch patterns unfold again
          and again under diﬀerent market conditions. Reviewing market moves that you
          missed sensitizes you to future occasions of opportunity.



          LESSON 40: USE IMAGERY TO
          ADVANCE THE CHANGE PROCESS

          The previous two lessons have emphasized the importance of repetition in
          cementing new ways of behaving and unlearning old patterns. By creating
          new opportunities to rehearse fresh skills, insights, and behavior patterns

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                              127

          we accelerate their internalization, freeing our minds for the basic tasks of
          trading.
              A huge advantage of the human brain in this context is the ability
          to generate experience virtually, through the use of imagination. If we
          vividly imagine a specific trading situation and visualize ourselves, step-by-
          step, enacting a new way of handling that situation, the mental rehearsal
          approaches the power of actual experience. You do not have to trade to
          rehearse many trading-related behaviors. By creating realistic situations in
          our minds and using imagination to summon our desired patterns, we can
          also cement these patterns.
              A technique that makes use of this kind of visualization is the stress in-
          oculation approach first described by Donald Meichenbaum. By mentally
          summoning stressful market scenarios and imagining in detail how we
          want to respond to these, we inoculate ourselves against those stresses by
          priming our coping mechanisms. This mental preparation can be applied
          to a range of situations, from ones that are psychologically challenging to
          those that require new trading methods.


              Our coping is mobilized when we imagine anticipated stressful sit-
              uations, preparing us for when those situations actually occur in
              trading.


               The key to making effective use of imagery is ensuring that the im-
          agery is vivid and evokes real feeling. Unlike a simple verbal repetition of a
          trading goal, imagery has the power to evoke the emotions associated with
          situations. This imagery turns the verbal recitation into a much closer ap-
          proximation of trading experience. When we vividly imagine a trade going
          through our mental stop-loss level before we can execute an exit, we sum-
          mon some of the fearful or frustrated feelings normally associated with un-
          expected loss. While we experience a mild version of the trading emotions
          (imagery can rarely fully duplicate actual experience), we can rehearse
          our best practices, keeping ourselves planful and disciplined in the face
          of stress. This mild exposure to the trading stress is like the body’s expo-
          sure to a weak form of a virus: it inoculates because it is strong enough to
          arouse adaptive responses, but not so strong as to pose a major threat.
               Few psychological techniques are as recognized and recommended as
          imagery, and few are executed as poorly. There are several facets of effec-
          tive imagery exercises:

            r Specificity—It’s not good enough to imagine a stressful situation,
              such as losing money or missing an opportunity, in the abstract. The
              imagery should be very specific and guided, visualizing a specific mar-
              ket and market situation, specific price levels, and specific market

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          128                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              action. It is the realism of the imagery that enables the exercises to
              serve as substitutes for actual experience.
            r Dynamism—The imagery should be more like a detailed, realistic
              movie rather than a broad, static snapshot. If you read a newspaper
              description of a situation, your reaction isn’t as strong as it would be if
              you were to see the same situation dramatized in a movie. The dynamic
              nature of imagery is essential to its realism, which in turn is essen-
              tial to the inoculation process. Flat, unconvincing images won’t arouse
              our coping, and they surely won’t be effective approximations of real
              trading experience.
            r Elaboration—If I had to identify the most common shortcoming in
              people’s use of imagery as a change technique, it would be their ten-
              dency to cut the imagery work short. Longer, more elaborated expo-
              sures to imagined challenges are more effective than very brief ex-
              posures. Indeed, if the exposures are too brief, you may unwittingly
              reinforce the pattern of fleeing from stresses! The best practice is to
              imagine a situation from beginning to end in elaborate detail—and
              then repeat the scenario until it no longer evokes emotion. This prac-
              tice not only reinforces coping, but mastery and success.

              An interesting technique from the behavioral literature is flooding:
              prolonged exposure to imagined situations that are highly stress-
              ful. Traders learn to stay in control even during a flood of stressful
              imagery, so they prepare themselves for most anything the mar-
              kets throw at them.

            r Variation—Traders commonly imagine a challenge scenario, evoke
              the imagery, and then quickly move on to something else. As we’ve
              already seen, repetition cements learning. By failing to use the princi-
              ple of repetition in the area of imagery, traders open themselves to the
              risks of relapse. Once you evoke a detailed, realistic trading scenario
              and how you would handle it and once you repeat the scene to the
              point of mastery, you then want to create variations on the scenario.
              For instance, you might begin by imagining a frustration associated
              with a fast-moving market. If your goal were to learn new coping pat-
              terns during periods of frustration, you would master this first scenario
              and then create variations, such as frustrations associated with slow
              markets or not getting filled on orders. Vary the scenarios and you can
              generalize your learning and make it increasingly applicable to actual
              trading conditions.
            r Consistency—Any single imagery session will not affect behavior
              over days and weeks. It is the daily repetition of the sessions that

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          Steps toward Self-Improvement                                                129


              yield enduring results. Many traders derive some benefit from initial
              imagery work and then promptly return to business as usual. Consis-
              tency in the use of the exercises ensures that the new patterns you’re
              rehearsing will remain top of the mind over time. Frequent use of im-
              agery work is a great way to sustain mindfulness about change and the
              need for change.

               When you are your own trading coach, you want to see and feel your-
          self to be successful, not just engage in occasional thoughts of success.
          In your internal world, you can practice skills, engage in new thought
          patterns, and achieve goals with consistency long before you actually ac-
          complish all of those in live trading. Your assignment is to generate pow-
          erful, elaborate imagery scenarios of stressful, challenging market situa-
          tions; the thoughts, feelings, and behavior patterns associated with those;
          and the specific steps you want to take to master those situations. When
          you construct your guided imagery, you want to feel the emotions of fear,
          greed, frustration, and boredom and imagine yourself tempted to engage
          in your usual, negative patterns in response to those states. In your imag-
          ined scenario, you will vividly envision yourself keeping those negative
          patterns in check and purposefully enacting your best practices. Thus, for
          instance, you might imagine yourself tempted to add to a position when it
          goes through your stop-loss level, but checking that temptation and instead
          acting on the stop.

              Imagination for the trader is the equivalent of a practice field for an
              athlete: a place to prepare for performance by creating simulated
              performance situations.

               You will be the trader you are capable of being in your imagery work
          and practice long before you consistently enact those ideals in your daily
          trading. There is no reason to take months or years to change behavior pat-
          terns when you can make every day an experience of concentrated learn-
          ing. Much of successful self-coaching is the result of a creative and tena-
          cious use of imagery and practice.


                      COACHING CUE

          Use your imagery to imagine yourself as the kind of trader you aspire to be: the
          risk taker, the disciplined decision maker, the patient executioner of ideas, the
          canny trader who learns from losing trades. If you create a role and an image of
          yourself in that role, you enact scenarios that, over time, become part of you.

P1: JYS
c04     JWBT039-Steenbarger   December 29, 2008    13:2    Printer: Yet to come




          130                                               THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          4: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-four-links.html
               Much of the framework discussed in this chapter comes from re-
          search into helping processes in brief therapy. Standard reference works
          in this area include the chapter on “Brief Therapy” written by Dewan,
          Steenbarger, and Greenberg for the volume Textbook of Psychiatry (Fifth
          Edition, Volume 1), edited by Robert E. Hales, Stuart C. Yudofsky, and
          Glen O. Gabbard (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2008) and the chap-
          ter on “Brief Psychotherapies” by the same authors for the reference work
          Psychiatry (Third Edition), edited by Allan Tasman, Jerald Kay, Jeffrey A.
          Lieberman, Michael B. First, and Mario Maj (Wiley, 2008).
               An excellent framework for thinking about making the most of
          strengths is the Gallup research described in Now, Discover Your
          Strengths, written by Marcus Buckingham and Donald O. Clifton (The Free
          Press, 2001). See also the popular management text Good to Great, written
          by Jim Collins (Harper Business, 2001).
               A full description of solution-focused work can be found in my chap-
          ter “Solution-Focused Brief Therapy: Doing What Works” in The Art and
          Science of Brief Psychotherapies, edited by Mantosh J. Dewan, Brett N.
          Steenbarger, and Roger P. Greenberg (American Psychiatric Publishing,
          2004).

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 5



                              Breaking Old
                                Patterns
                          Psychodynamic Frameworks
                               for Self-Coaching



                     The strangest and most fantastic fact about negative
                     emotions is that people actually worship them.
                                                       —P.D. Ouspensky




                 o this point, we’ve been exploring processes that are common to all

         T       change efforts and all performance coaching. Now we begin a look at
                 individual frameworks for coaching, beginning with psychodynamic
          modalities. These frameworks are approaches that emphasize the con-
          tinuity of past and present—how old patterns replay themselves in the
          present—and the ways in which current relationships can remake patterns
          born of prior, negative relationship experiences.
               The psychodynamic framework is more commonly connected to long-
          term psychoanalysis than to coaching, but I’ve found tremendous value in
          utilizing the medium of relationship experiences to help traders with their
          performance. This chapter will explain how psychodynamics are related
          to trading and how the dynamic framework can inform your own efforts at
          self-coaching.
               I personally draw most upon dynamic modalities when I’m working
          on trading problems that are part of larger life challenges—particularly
          when those challenges have been part of our life histories prior to
          trading. Many issues that impact trading—concerns over success/failure,
          self-confidence/self-doubt, security/insecurity—predate our trading ef-
          forts, but play themselves out in how we make financial decisions.
               The best way to describe psychodynamics is as a way of thinking, as
          well as a set of tools, to help ensure that people’s pasts don’t become their
          futures. And, in the context of this book, it all starts with a single insight:

                                                                                       131

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          132                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          we have relationships with our markets, and those relationships repeat
          patterns that we’ve enacted in other relationships. Let’s take a look at how
          we break free of those patterns . . .


          LESSON 41: PSYCHODYNAMICS: ESCAPE
          THE GRAVITY OF PAST RELATIONSHIPS

          The psychodynamic approaches to change have evolved significantly from
          the psychoanalytic work of Sigmund Freud and the subsequent contri-
          butions of “neo-Freudians.” In the process of this evolution, psychody-
          namic thought has turned away from viewing instincts and sexuality as the
          primary basis for behavior and toward an interpersonal understanding of
          recurring conflicts and patterns. At the same time, psychodynamic psy-
          chology has also departed from the analytic couch and the presumption
          of therapy as a long-term process, emphasizing more active, shorter-term
          methods of change. Surprisingly, this evolution has largely taken place
          outside the public eye, contributing to a perception that analytic methods
          are outmoded and outdated. Nothing could be further from the truth.
               The core perspective of the psychodynamic model is that cur-
          rent problems are reenactments of conflicts and patterns from past
          relationships. The self is viewed as the result of years of internalization
          of relationship experiences. When we enjoy positive, affirming relation-
          ships, we internalize a positive self-image and concept. Negative, conflicted
          relationships are internalized as a negative and conflicted sense of self.
          This perspective touches on one of the themes from earlier in this book:
          relationships serve as mirrors by which we experience ourselves. We are
          the sum of our significant relationship experiences.
               Over the lifespan, we learn coping strategies (defenses) for deal-
          ing with the anxieties brought by relationship conflicts and their conse-
          quences. These defenses may be successful in warding off discomfort, but
          they tend to become outmoded in future relationships and life situations.
          When current situations trigger the feelings evoked by past relationship
          problems, our outmoded defenses lead us to behave in ways that bring un-
          wanted outcomes. These patterns of feelings evoked from the past along
          with the defensive reactions and negative consequences constitute what
          Lester Luborsky calls core conflictual relationship themes. These themes
          repeat themselves in various ways, across various situations, causing us to
          behave in unwanted ways. The purpose of counseling and therapy, from
          this vantage point, is to free us from these cyclical maladaptive patterns.

              When we “overreact” to situations, the odds are good that
              we’re reacting to themes from our past as well as the current
              situations that trigger those themes.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      133


               To use an example from The Psychology of Trading, I grew up in a very
          close family. My parents were both estranged from their parents and vowed
          to create a very different family environment for their children. They were
          so successful in that regard that I sometimes felt that the environment was
          too close. I sought privacy, taking long bicycle rides, walks, and even show-
          ers. Later, when I met my wife Margie and became part of a household with
          her three children, I found myself taking long showers and withdrawing
          from family life. This disrupted morning routines and led to a bit of tension
          in the household.
               For years I had lived alone and had never experienced the feeling of be-
          ing too close to others. When I entered a new family situation, the old feel-
          ings from my formative experiences came back to me and I coped rigidly
          in my old way: by withdrawing and seeking privacy. What worked in child-
          hood, however, failed dismally in the new family. By reenacting old de-
          fenses in new situations, I created a fresh set of problems.
               All of these defenses tend to happen automatically, outside of con-
          scious awareness. Without some way of making these repetitive patterns
          conscious, we cannot change them. One goal of psychodynamic work is to
          make the unconscious conscious: to make us self-aware, so that we can
          find new endings to old conflicts. I was able to change my patterns within
          the family once I recognized that I no longer needed to cope in ways from
          my past: my present family wasn’t my former one, and I was no longer
          a child.

              The first goal of psychodynamic work is insight: recognition
              and understanding of one’s patterns and awareness of their
              limitations. The key insight is simply: You had a reason for doing
              this in the past; you don’t have to do it any more.

              So how does this relate to trading? The risk and uncertainty of
          trading—the gains and losses, victories and defeats—have an uncanny
          way of triggering feelings from our past. A classic example is the trader
          who felt as though he never measured up to his parents’ standards and
          expectations. He brings his sense of inferiority to the markets, taking im-
          prudent risks to prove that he truly is a success. Of course, no amount of
          winning in markets can fill the emotional void, leading him to take ever-
          greater risks, until he finally blows up—and confirms his worst fears. In
          such a situation, no tweaking of trading methods will solve the trader’s
          problem. Until he resolves the conflict at the heart of his dilemma, he will
          continually find himself acting out his personal dramas in his trading.

              Many trading problems are the result of acting out personal
              dramas in markets.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          134                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               The best way to identify situations in which past conflicts intrude into
          current trading is to consult the feelings evoked by your trading prob-
          lems. If they are similar to feelings you’ve experienced in past career and
          relationship situations, there’s a good chance that they represent the
          leading edge of cyclical maladaptive patterns. For instance, if your frus-
          tration gets you into trouble in your trading and has also gotten you into
          trouble with friends and romantic partners, there’s a clear pattern that tran-
          scends markets. If trading leaves you with the same conflicted, hurt feel-
          ings that you’ve experienced in your past, that’s a sign that the past is re-
          fusing to stay in the past.
               As your own trading coach, you sometimes need to dig beneath the
          surface of problems to discover their origins. This discovery must be
          accomplished by reviewing your personal history and mapping that his-
          tory against recent experience. In other words, you want to look not only
          at your current patterns, but past ones as well. It’s in the overlap that we
          can make greatest use of psychodynamic change methods.
               Your assignment is to take a sheet of paper and draw two sets of
          sine waves, each with at least four peaks and four troughs. For the first
          set of sine waves, you’ll mark the peaks with the “peak experiences”
          from your life: your most positive and fulfilling experiences. These ex-
          periences can be taken from any life sphere, from relationships to ca-
          reer. You’ll label the troughs with the most negative experiences of your
          life, again from any sphere. These experiences will be those filled with
          the most emotional pain and distress. By the time you’re finished, the
          first sine wave chart should be filled with the highlights and lowlights of
          your life.
               When you’re finished with the first set of sine waves, you’ll fill out the
          second set similarly, only you’ll limit your entries to trading-related in-
          cidents. Thus, you’ll mark the peaks of the sine waves with your most pos-
          itive and fulfilling trading experiences and the valleys of the sine waves
          with your most painful and upsetting market-related experiences. Make
          sure that all of your entries from both sets of sine waves are described
          in sufficient detail that you can readily appreciate why each incident was a
          peak or valley experience.
               The real work comes in when you compare the peaks across the two
          sets of waves and the valleys. You’re looking for common themes that link
          your life experience with your trading experience. Many of these com-
          monalities will be at an emotional level. Here are some common ones to
          look out for:

            r Themes of adequacy and inadequacy.
            r Themes of rebellion against rules and discipline.
            r Themes of boredom and risk taking.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008     13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         135

            r Themes of achievement/hopefulness and failure/discouragement.
            r Themes of recognition and rejection.
            r Themes of contentment/acceptance and anger/frustration.
            r Themes of safety and danger.

              If the markets are making you feel the way you’ve felt during some
          of your life’s valley experiences, consider the possibility that you’ve been
          caught in a web of repetitive conflict and coping. Recognizing that web
          and keeping it firmly in mind is half the battle of changing it. As your own
          trading coach, you want to be mindful in your trading, not unconsciously
          repeating your past. It is much more difficult to fall into old, destructive
          patterns when you’re clear on what those patterns are.


                      COACHING CUE

          So often, we’re ﬁghting the last psychological battle. Identify the most recent
          conﬂicted relationship experience in your life and the thoughts, feelings, and
          behaviors evoked by that relationship. Then take a look at your most recent trad-
          ing diﬃculties to see if similar thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are involved.
          Many times, it’s not just early childhood relationships that color our current
          behavior, but the most recent sets of conﬂicts. Identifying how you resolved
          those problems in the relationship (or are taking steps to resolve them if they
          are current) can be very helpful in minimizing their spillover into trading.




          LESSON 42: CRYSTALLIZE OUR
          REPETITIVE PATTERNS

          In the previous lesson, we used sine wave charts to identify peak and valley
          experiences from our life histories and from our trading. Once we have the
          sense that there are, indeed, commonalities, the next step is to crystallize
          these patterns so that we clearly understand why they exist and how they
          repeat themselves.
               First, however, let’s address the question of what it means if you can-
          not find common themes across the peaks and valleys of your charted ex-
          perience. One possibility is that you need to draw more peaks and valleys
          on each chart before the themes will become salient. Another is that you
          are looking at the events logically, not psychologically. Examine the peaks
          and valleys for similarities of motivation and emotion, not surface detail.
          Many times the common elements will jump out when we think of the pat-
          terns as emotional recurrences.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          136                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Sometimes, though, there truly aren’t links between our trading prob-
          lems and our prior life’s challenges. The trading problems may simply re-
          flect shifting markets, a lack of skills and experience, or situational factors
          related to present-day distractions. If these are the most important sources
          of current trading difficulties, the psychodynamic approach will be less rel-
          evant to your change efforts. Rather, you may need to structure your learn-
          ing process, as described in the Enhancing Trader Performance book, or
          you might need to adopt a framework that is more present-centered, such
          as the self-coaching approaches described in chapters 6 and 7.


              Not all trading problems have an emotional genesis. Sometimes we
              just need to hone our trading skills.

               In my experience, the most fertile area to seek for similarities between
          trading problems and prior life conflicts is in significant relationships: those
          with parents and romantic partners. Conflicts with parents and lovers
          are usually among the most emotionally powerful, and are the ones we
          are most likely to defend against—and thus reenact—in our trading.
          Once we crystallize those patterns, we can become quite adept at recogniz-
          ing their reappearance. That is the first step toward short-circuiting them
          and providing them with a new ending.
               One trader I worked with had numerous relationships with girlfriends
          over the years, but he never committed to any of them. Indeed, he often
          kept one relationship on the side in case his primary one ever fell through.
          He had lost a sibling when he was young; his parents, devastated by the
          loss, tried to forge on by not dwelling on the tragedy. Our trader learned to
          defend against loss by never getting too involved with another person. This
          defense kept him from reexperiencing the pain of the childhood event, but
          it also kept him from having a fulfilling emotional life.
               So what do you think his trading problem was? Although he described
          himself as being passionately interested in trading, he in fact spent surpris-
          ingly little time at it. He undertraded markets—in other words ignored trad-
          ing signals, traded with almost ludicrously small size—and he was easily
          distracted by communications in chat rooms and reading web sites. While
          he justified the latter as “preparation” for his trading, he never actually got
          around to trading seriously. Just as he avoided commitment and loss in
          relationships, he dabbled at the edges of markets, never achieving anything
          close to his potential.
               To crystallize this pattern, a good place to begin is with our under-
          lying need. The trader in the example above has an overwhelming need
          for safety and consequently takes the path in relationships and trading that
          seems safest. The feeling that he is guarding against is the pain of loss: the
          vulnerability of investing oneself and losing that emotional investment. The

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                        137

          trader was close to his sibling; he never truly recovered from the fallout of
          the loss. The way that he defends against that feeling is by keeping com-
          mitments at bay. He avoids becoming too involved with his relationships
          and trading so that he can never experience a loss as painful as that from
          his childhood. This leaves him with a host of negative consequences. Most
          of all, he feels empty, not truly fulfilled in love or career.
               Most repetitive patterns can be broken down into this schematic of:

            r Need—What we are missing, what we crave.
            r Feeling State—Distress associated with not having that need met.
            r Defense—What we do to cope and avoid the painful feeling state.
            r Repetitions—How we replay defenses in current situations.
            r Consequences—The negative outcomes from our current defensive
              efforts.

               One trader I met with had an intense need for emotional support. His
          parents had divorced at an early age and his mother quickly remarried,
          forcing him to cope with joining a blended family. He frequently felt aban-
          doned by his mother, and he felt not good enough to merit his (distant)
          father’s involvement. His defense against these feelings was to take the role
          of overachiever, pushing himself to get the best grades at school, excel at
          athletics, and star in extracurricular activities. By doing more, he hoped
          to feel more worthy. As a result, however, he frequently drove himself to
          exhaustion and periods of hopelessness, as no amount of achievement
          could substitute for the parental love he missed. Unlike the trader from the
          prior example, he worked himself to the bone in trading, at times breaking
          down when his overachieving tendencies failed to bring results.
               So this, as your own trading coach, is your psychodynamic challenge:
          figure out your core need. Most often, this will be something that you
          wanted in past relationships and could not consistently obtain. It might be
          autonomy, love, respect, or support. Once you identify that need, you want
          to review your valley experiences from your sine wave charts and clearly
          identify the feeling states that have been associated with the frustration of
          your core need. Maybe that feeling is depression and sadness, maybe it’s
          anxiety, and maybe it’s anger and frustration. This feeling, quite likely, will
          be the one that is repeated in your most difficult trading experiences.


              The needs that are most unmet in our personal lives are the ones
              most likely to sabotage our trading.


              Now reflect on how you try to make that feeling go away. That is your
          defensive pattern, your way of coping with the pain of needs going unmet.
          Most likely, this coping is what most immediately brings you difficulties in

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          138                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your trading, causing you to overtrade, stand aside during times of opportu-
          nity, etc. At these times, you’re making trading decisions, not to manage
          your capital, but to manage the distress from those core conflicts. Our
          worst trading occurs when we’re managing our feelings rather than our
          positions.
               Your assignment is to draw upon your sine wave charts from the pre-
          vious lesson to map your trading problems as sequences of needs, feel-
          ings, coping/defenses, and consequences. You should be able to draw an
          accurate flow chart that shows how feelings associated with frustrated
          needs lead you to take actions that bring present-day problems. This chart
          will capture the focus of your psychodynamic self-coaching efforts. By
          breaking this pattern and inserting new elements, we can become more
          intentional in our trading, more self-determined in our results.


                      COACHING CUE

          Most traders, I ﬁnd, don’t require long-term therapy. If traders are signiﬁcantly
          troubled, they cannot sustain a trading career. Rather, they cope and function
          well, but periodically lapse into old patterns that interfere with their eﬀective-
          ness. Many times, traders can identify their patterns by identifying their most
          frequent and costly departures from their trading plans and then noting the
          feelings and situations that accompanied these departures. By noting feelings
          from recent trading problems and then observing when you’ve felt those feel-
          ings in other areas of life, you can crystallize patterns that are most likely to
          impact future trading.




          LESSON 43: CHALLENGE
          OUR DEFENSES

          A cardinal idea within psychodynamic work is that the problems that mo-
          tivate people to make change efforts are rarely the core conflicts that they
          are repeating across situations. Rather, it’s their defending against the pain
          of those conflicts that brings the unfortunate consequences and the recog-
          nition of the need for change. Our problems, from this vantage point, are
          the result of our rigid, outmoded coping. What worked for us at one time
          of life now works against us.
               A good example from the markets is “revenge trading.” This occurs
          when we trade more aggressively following losses in an attempt to get our
          money back all at once. Pain and frustration from a loss lead to an angry
          defensive response, an effort to get rid of the hurt. At that point, the trading

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                       139


          is not about opportunity; it’s a defense to keep the feelings of disappoint-
          ment and loss at bay. Of course, this often leads to further losses and a
          fresh set of consequences.
               The defense is there because, deep down, the trader doesn’t believe
          that she can tolerate the hurt or sadness of loss. Perhaps at one time
          of life such pain was indeed intolerable. Now, as a mature adult, the
          trader can handle normal losses, whether in business, markets, or love.
          It doesn’t feel that way, however, and the trader continues to handle losses
          in the old, childhood ways. By crystallizing the pattern, the trader builds
          a self-observing capacity and a clearer awareness of the consequences
          of perpetuating old cycles. It is this heightened awareness that eventu-
          ally enables the trader to challenge defenses and respond to old threats in
          new ways.


              Change in the psychodynamic mode means doing what doesn’t
              come naturally: refrain from the old ways of coping that keep un-
              pleasant feelings at bay.

               In your role as your own trading coach, you interrupt cyclical problems
          by becoming their observer, not the one caught inside the patterns. By ob-
          serving, you stand outside the cycles; they no longer consume you. The
          sine wave and flow charts described earlier are useful tools in sustaining
          this self-awareness. Your goal is to recognize repetitive patterns before they
          have an opportunity to play themselves out to their unhappy conclusions.
               One way of accomplishing this will form the basis for your next coach-
          ing task. You’ll typically observe a pattern beginning to emerge when an
          associated feeling state interrupts your trading. In the revenge-trading ex-
          ample above, that characteristic feeling might be frustration and tension.
          In other situations, the feeling may be one of loss or emptiness. As soon as
          you notice the characteristic feeling, you want to acknowledge it out loud,
          almost as if you are a play-by-play sports announcer. For instance, you
          might say aloud, “I just took a loss and now I’m feeling really frustrated.
          I’m feeling mad, and I want to get my money back. I want to find another
          trade, but that’s what’s hurt me in the past. I jump back into the market and
          it makes things worse.”
               If you cannot invoke this self-observation aloud—perhaps because
          you’re trading in a room with others—a psychological journal can accom-
          plish the same function. The key is to describe in detail what you are think-
          ing and feeling, what you are tempted to do to make the thoughts and feel-
          ings go away, and how this course of action has hurt you in the past. “I’m
          disgusted with myself and I want to just quit trading for the day,” would be
          one self-observation from a trader who rides a cycle of aggressive trading,

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          140                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          losing money, guilt, withdrawal from markets, and renewed attempts at ag-
          gressive trading to make up for lost time and opportunity. You’re taking
          the role of psychologist, identifying what is going on instead of identifying
          with it.


              When you describe a pattern of behavior, you’re no longer identi-
              fied with it.

               At this point, we’re not concerned with changing the pattern. Rather,
          we’re becoming more alert to its appearance and more aware of its man-
          ifestations and consequences. This can take days and even weeks of con-
          sistent effort as you sustain the stance of the self-observer. With this ef-
          fort, it’s inevitable that, at times, you’ll interrupt the pattern entirely: you’ll
          avoid the revenge trade or the overaggressive trade. Before you do the right
          things, you’ll stop doing the wrong ones. This builds a sense of mastery and
          self-control: you’re starting to control the patterns instead of having them
          control you.
               Talking aloud and writing in journals, by themselves, will not rid you of
          overlearned behavior patterns, but they do provide you with options. Just
          by doing something different—even in small degree, such as placing much
          smaller revenge trades—you achieve a measure of control.
               One type of talking aloud to gain self-awareness is to actively remind
          yourself that what is going on in the present is not really the problem.
          The problem is what happened and hurt you in the past, not what you are
          reacting (overreacting) to in the present. For instance, you might be losing
          money on a position prior to hitting your stop-out level. You catch yourself
          feeling fear and you’re tempted to bail out of the trade prematurely. In ad-
          dition to talking this fear and temptation aloud, you would remind yourself,
          “The loss on this particular position is not the real issue. I’m reacting to my
          losses from last year (or the loss of my relationship). Abandoning my trade
          idea isn’t going to take away those old losses.”
               (Notice, of course, how this example presumes that you’ve allocated
          a responsible size to your position and a reasonable stop-loss level. If not,
          it could be your poor trading and not any problems from your past that
          would be triggering—quite reasonably!—your fear and desire to exit.)
               What you’re really emphasizing in this talking aloud is the message of,
          “The problem isn’t my trading; it’s something else.” That frees you up to
          deal with the “something else” and not act out the past in the present. It
          also frees you to simply deal with your trade as a trade and not as some-
          thing more emotionally laden. You’ll know that you’ve made significant
          progress when you consistently catch your patterns as they unfold, main-
          taining the role of observer rather than passive participant.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         141


                     COACHING CUE

          I’ve mentioned in this book and in Enhancing Trader Performance how video-
          taping markets can sensitize traders to patterns of supply and demand, aiding
          them in trading decisions. I’ve had traders turn the tables and turn the video-
          recorder on themselves, so that they’re recording themselves as they trade. It’s
          a great tool for self-observation and recognizing your emotional and behavioral
          patterns. After you’ve seen a few of your recurring cycles on tape, you become
          more sensitive to their appearance during real-time trading.




          LESSON 44: ONCE AGAIN, WITH
          FEELING: GET DISTANCE FROM YOUR
          PROBLEM PATTERNS

          Two crucial transitions that occur in psychodynamic work are viewing
          your past patterns as alien to you and experiencing them as your own, per-
          sonal obstacles. Once you’ve become skilled at recognizing your old ways
          and their disruption of your trading, you next step is to distance your-
          self from them. You will not gravitate toward ways of thinking, feeling, and
          acting if these patterns feel alien to you and if you view them as sources
          of pain.
               A term commonly used in psychodynamic writing is ego alien. What
          that means is that some way of viewing the world, experiencing it, or acting
          within it has become foreign to one’s sense of self. When a person starts to
          repeat a pattern that has become ego alien, the resulting thoughts are:

              “This is not the real me.”
              “This is what I used to do; not what I want to be doing.”
              “I’m reacting to the past, not to what’s happening now.”

               Of course, no one consciously owns destructive behavior patterns.
          It is easy, however, to repeat them unthinkingly. When we make those
          patterns ego-alien, we’re not just thinking about them, we’re actively
          rejecting them.
               It’s helpful in this regard to start thinking about the old me and the new
          me. The old me was afraid of failure and equated falling short with losing
          the love and approval of others. The new me realizes that the outcome of
          any single trade will not make me a better or worse human being. The old
          me became angry and frustrated when I couldn’t get my way, because I
          hated feeling out of control. The new me controls my trading through my

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          142                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          planning and lets the market do what it will do. Notice how keeping a clear
          distinction between the old and new helps traders identify with positive,
          constructive patterns and maintain distance from old, automatic ones.


              “Am I reacting to markets or to my feelings from the past?”—This
              is the question that follows from self-observation.

               Another way to frame this distinction is to focus on “here’s what I
          do to make money; here’s what I do to lose money.” Whenever you en-
          tertain a certain thought or course of action, ask yourself, “Is this how I
          think/act when I make money, or is it how I think/act when I lose money?”
          Once again, by focusing on the likely outcomes of what you’re doing, you
          become the observer of your patterns and interrupt the automatic replay-
          ing of those patterns.
               As we saw earlier in discussing the costs of patterns, focusing on the
          consequences of destructive patterns from the past not only keeps those
          patterns alien, but also heightens your motivation to not repeat them. If
          you recall a recent incident of losing money or opportunity as the result
          of falling into old habits, it is a great way to avoid making the same mis-
          take again, particularly if that recollection highlights the monetary cost and
          emotional pain of the incident. In The Psychology of Trading, I emphasize
          the importance of treating old, negative patterns as an enemy. If you view
          something as an enemy, it’s difficult to embrace it and it becomes easier to
          sustain efforts at changing it.
               Most people are uncomfortable with the emotion of hate. We’ve been
          taught that it’s not right to hate; that we should be nice to others. Hate,
          however, has its uses. Hate implies total rejection—a complete pushing
          away from the self. When we hate our past patterns, we are so attuned
          to their destructive consequences that we will move heaven and earth to
          not repeat them. The addict who has seen the destructive consequences of
          substance abuse learns to hate drugs; the person who has gone through a
          painful marriage and divorce to a narcissistic partner is so disgusted with
          the experience that she’ll never make that same mistake again. There is
          no question in my mind that I would not have found my life partner had
          I not had prior, unsatisfying relationships. I so hated the way I felt in bad
          relationships that I was absolutely determined to find something better.

              When we hate how our old patterns have hurt us, we find a source
              of positive motivation: the drive for a better life.

             There’s an old saw in Alcoholics Anonymous that alcohol abusers
          have to hit bottom before they sustain efforts at sobriety. Before serious

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008      13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                           143


          consequences have accumulated, it’s all too easy to deny and minimize
          problems, putting them out of mind. When you hit bottom the conse-
          quences have gotten to the point where they cannot be ignored; they have
          inflicted too much pain and damage. At that point, people give up entirely,
          or they reach the point of hating what their habit has done to their lives. “I
          can’t go back there again,” is the feeling of many people who have reached
          that point of hate and disgust. At that point, the old ways are held at arm’s
          length; there is no identification with them.
               A great application of this idea (and worthwhile homework exercise)
          is to focus on one enemy that you want to conquer over the next month of
          trading. Your choice should be a pattern of thinking, feeling, and acting that
          has noticeably hurt your trading in the past several months, and it should
          be a pattern that you’ve observed in others areas of your life. This is espe-
          cially powerful if, with your sine wave charts, you’ve observed damaging
          consequences of the pattern not only in trading but also in those other life
          areas. You can then call to mind all the pain that this pattern has caused
          you over the years and the prices you’ve paid for repeating the pattern.
          You declare that pattern your enemy and then you purposefully look for
          opportunities to confront this enemy in each day’s trading.
               Notice that this is different from simply observing a pattern as it’s hap-
          pening. Instead, you’re actively anticipating the pattern and even looking
          forward to its appearance so that you have the opportunity to reject it. The
          trader’s frame of mind becomes, “I’m not the problem; it’s this old pattern
          that’s the problem.” Once you frame outmoded ways of thinking and acting
          as leftovers from the past that no longer work for you, you’ve taken a giant
          step toward freeing yourself from those patterns.
               It will take sustained effort to tackle your enemy, but it can be tremen-
          dously fun and empowering as well. Each time you notice your old ways of
          losing money and refuse to engage in them, you’ve won a victory against
          your enemy—and struck a blow for your own sense of confidence and

                      COACHING CUE

          One of the ﬁrst enemies to tackle in self-coaching is procrastination. We pro-
          crastinate when we know we need to change, but cannot summon and sustain
          a sense of urgency. In that situation, procrastination itself becomes the pattern
          we must battle, as it robs us of the power to change our lives. Often, procrastina-
          tion is itself a defense—a way of avoiding anxieties associated with anticipated
          changes. By starting with small, nonthreatening changes that we undertake ev-
          ery single day, we do battle with procrastination and build a sense of control
          and mastery over change processes. Big goals and radical changes often meet
          with procrastination. If you focus on intermediate goals that can be pursued
          regularly, you rob change of its threat value.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          144                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          mastery. If you are highly competitive and achievement-oriented, ask
          yourself if you want to win your freedom of will or lose it to the repeti-
          tion of your past. The competitive soul does not want to lose and will fight
          an enemy to the death. A powerful aid to change is to use your competitive
          drive to defeat the enemies of your happiness: your internal demons.



          LESSON 45: MAKE THE MOST OUT OF
          YOUR COACHING RELATIONSHIP

          One of the cardinal principles of psychodynamic work is that change of-
          ten occurs in the context of relationships. When you are your own trading
          coach, one of your challenges is to surround yourself with the right kind
          of relationships: ones that support your goals and mirror to you the person
          and trader you’re capable of being.
               Consider two coaching scenarios in which I’m working with a trader
          at a trading firm. In both situations, the trader has lost more money than
          planned by exceeding position and loss limits. An entire week’s profit is
          wiped out by the single day’s loss. In the first scenario, I chide the trader:

              “How could you be so careless? You just ruined your week. Do you
              realize what will happen if you continue to do this? This is not a
              good time to be on the street looking for a firm hiring new traders.”

              In the second scenario, I adopt a different tone:

              “C’mon, you’re a better trader than that! Remember last month when
              you put together a string of winning days? You never needed to
              put on big size to do that. Let’s see if we can get back to that great
              trading.”

               The first interaction mirrors a sense of failure; “I’m so disappointed in
          you!” is the tone of the message. The approach also focuses on the negative,
          emphasizing the worst-case scenario.
               The second scenario doesn’t avoid the problem, but starts from the
          premise of good trading. It mirrors encouragement and a reminder of the
          trader’s strengths.
               Imagine that these interactions occur day after day, week after week.
          It’s not difficult to see how the first approach would undercut a trader’s
          security and confidence, leading to further bad trading. The second inter-
          action would likely help a trader get back to trading well. It would coach
          success, not just the avoidance of failure.
               All traders inevitably coach themselves: they always talk to them-
          selves about performance, take action to improve performance, and keep

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      145

          track of results. The only question is the degree to which this self-coaching
          is purposeful, guided, and constructive. From a psychodynamic perspec-
          tive, your self-coaching is no different from a relationship with a profes-
          sional coach: the dynamics of that relationship will serve as a mirror, and
          you’ll tend to internalize what is reflected.


              Our self-talk is our self-coaching.


               What this means is that how you focus on your problem patterns from
          the past is crucial to the success of your self-coaching. You are going to
          fall back into old patterns sometimes; you are going to miss opportunities
          to enact new, positive patterns. There will be occasions in which you work
          hard to avoid one pattern, only to fall into another one. All of these situa-
          tions can be discouraging and frustrating. Yet, as your own coach, you are
          tasked with the responsibility of maintaining a constructive relationship
          with you, your student.
               “Comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable,” is the way I de-
          scribed my approach to working with people in The Psychology of Trading.
          It’s not a bad formulation for coaching oneself. When you’re afflicted—
          suffering, hurting, losing—you want to be your own best support. When
          you’re winning, you want to be afflicting yourself by doubling down on
          your discipline, alert to any overconfidence that might allow old habits to
          reenter your trade.
               A great exercise is to cull through your trading journal and examine
          the emotional tone of your writings. Do they sound like positive coaching
          communications, or are they negative, frustrated, and blaming? Do they
          place equal emphasis on your progress and achievements, or do they harp
          on what you didn’t do right?
               The worst thing you can do as a trading coach is reenact old personal
          patterns by adopting the voice of a past figure who was part of the de-
          structive cyclical conflicts that you’re trying to move beyond. If you had a
          parent who was hostile and critical, one who couldn’t be pleased; if you
          had a spouse who could not acknowledge your achievements or a resent-
          ful sibling, you don’t want to replay their voices in your own self-coaching.
          How you treat yourself may well be part of the very pattern you’re trying to
          change: working on your coaching voice is a great way to move that work
          forward.


              Perfectionism is often a hostile, rejecting set of self-communica-
              tions that masquerades as a drive for achievement.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          146                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               One trader I work with actually talks to himself in the third person
          when he is in his self-coaching mode, reviewing his goals and perfor-
          mance in tape recordings that he then replays during breaks in the day.
          He might say, “Bill, today you need to be alert for your temptation to
          overtrade this market. That got you into trouble last week. We’re coming
          up to a Fed announcement and it’s unlikely that the market is going to
          move much until that’s out of the way. Let’s make sure you do it right this
          week!”
               Day after day, listening to messages such as this, turns intentional
          coaching talk into internalized self-talk. After a long period of saying the
          right things, you’ll start to feel them and repeat them to yourself auto-
          matically. The coaching role, at that point, has truly become part of you.
          Conversely, if your self-coaching voice is one of frustration, you are culti-
          vating a relationship with yourself that can only rob you of motivation and
          confidence over time. Many traders think they are pushing themselves to
          succeed when, in fact, all they are doing is replaying critical, hostile voices
          from past relationships.
               One trader I worked with would make significant money with many
          more winning trades than losing ones, but you would never know it from
          the way he talked. He always focused on the losing trades, the trades that
          he could have left on longer for greater profits, and the trades he could
          have exited sooner. The basic message of his talk was that anything he did
          was not good enough. When it came time for him to increase his risk and
          pursue larger profits, he hit the wall and could not make the change. Days,
          weeks, and months of telling himself that his trading was not good enough
          undercut his ability to be confident trading large size. He thought he was
          coaching himself for success by refusing to be content with his gains, but
          in reality he was wounding his self-esteem.
               A far different approach to self-coaching was exemplified by the trader
          who set challenging, but reachable, performance goals and then promised
          himself (and his wife) a long-awaited vacation abroad if he reached those
          goals. When he recruited his spouse into his efforts to improve his trad-
          ing and chose an incentive that meant a great deal to both of them, he
          was able to sustain a positive motivation. This made their trip especially
          rewarding, as it was a tangible reminder of his success. In this situa-
          tion, he cultivated a relationship with himself that fed self-esteem and
          mastery.
               The central message of the psychodynamic approach is that we are the
          sum of our significant relationships. None of our relationships is quite so
          central as the one that we have with ourselves. In coaching ourselves, we
          take control over our relationship to our self ; the voice that we use as
          coach will be the voice that enters our head when we tackle the risk and
          uncertainty of markets.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         147


                     COACHING CUE

          Coaches typically address their teams before a game to emphasize important
          lessons and build motivation. Consider addressing yourself before the start of
          market days, stressing your plans and goals for the session. Tape record your
          address and then review it midday. Pay particular attention to how you speak
          to yourself: it’s much harder to lapse into negativity when you take the time to
          make your self-talk explicit and then approach that self-talk from the perspec-
          tive of a listener.




          LESSON 46: FIND POSITIVE
          TRADING RELATIONSHIPS

          Why do people hire a personal trainer to help them get into shape when
          they already know which exercises they should be doing? Why does a
          hedge fund hire a coach to work with experienced portfolio managers,
          when those managers know far more about the business than the coach?
          Why do elite athletes who have more skills than anyone they could possibly
          hire still rely on performance coaches?
               An understanding of the psychodynamics of personal change makes
          the answers to these questions perfectly clear. In each case, hiring a coach
          or trainer takes an individual development process and turns it into an in-
          terpersonal process. This is one of the most powerful steps anyone can
          take toward accelerating their learning curves, but it is poorly understood.
               When you pursue a goal with other people, you add a new source of
          motivation to your efforts. We know from the research in psychology that
          the most important ingredient in counseling and therapy outcomes is the
          quality of the relationship between the client and the helper. This makes
          sense: when the helper is valued, the client wants to not only make changes
          for himself, but also for the counselor. You don’t want to let down someone
          you value and who’s working for you. If you decide to go to the gym every
          other day to work out and get into shape, it’s easy to skip a day here or
          there. But if you make that commitment with a close friend, you won’t
          want to disappoint that person. You’re more likely to stick to your plans.

              Making a commitment to change to others adds a layer of motiva-
              tion and helps the other person motivate you.

              Bring another person into change efforts and you will introduce a new
          source of mirroring. A good athletic trainer will provide you with feedback

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          148                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          about how you’re doing and will keep your motivation up, even as you seem
          to plateau in your efforts. One of the helpers at a diet center will help you
          track your weight loss, providing you with positive feedback when you’re
          working the plan. Day after day, exposure to this encouragement makes
          it easier for you to generate your own encouraging self-talk. You become
          your own coach, in part, by internalizing the role of an actual helper.
                To achieve this benefit, it is not necessary that your mentor be pro-
          fessionally trained or that your relationship with them be a commercial
          one. Alcoholics Anonymous is a great example of a peer organization in
          which experienced members aid newcomers. The group meetings provide
          a supportive environment for change; the slogans and readings provide a
          shared set of beliefs and commitments; and the relationship with a sponsor
          provides the motivation of working with someone who cares about your
          life. The net effect is to mirror a new identity for the participant: an iden-
          tity as a recovering person, not simply that of a failed addict.
                As a trading coach, I work hard to take money out of the equation
          with the traders and portfolio managers I work with. I routinely receive
          phone calls and e-mail from traders who update me on their progress. I
          wouldn’t think of billing for that. That’s not because I’m an altruist; it’s
          because I want to emphasize that this isn’t simply about the money. I want
          no impediments to a trader calling me, and I want the trader calling me
          because I care about what happens to them, not because I want to generate
          a billing. For me, it’s about the relationship and doing everything I can to
          aid the trader’s happiness and success, and my hope is that it becomes that
          way for the traders as well. Frequently, my motivation to see the trader
          succeed carries him through the rocky periods of self-doubt. It’s easier for
          me to see his strengths than it is for him at such times.

              A good coach is one who never loses sight of the best within you.


               As your own trading coach, you don’t need to hire someone like me
          in order to make meaningful change or to extend your change efforts
          to an interpersonal context. Rather, you can maximize your efforts at
          self-development by creating your own performance team—a group of
          like-minded, mutually concerned peers who help each other. If I were
          going into full-time trading, one of my first steps would be to scour blog
          comments, forum postings, conference attendees, and similar gatherings
          of traders to find people who trade my markets and take trading seri-
          ously. I wouldn’t need clones, just traders who are compatible with me
          in their trading instruments and time frames. I would then reach out to
          form what I call virtual trading groups: a group of peers who trade their
          own capital, but freely share ideas and help one another. The group would
          have to be chosen carefully, and all participants would have to share their

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                        149

          trade ideas and trading results completely freely. In such an environment,
          the group members could cross-fertilize each other’s views, support one
          another during difficult periods, and learn from one another. A particularly
          valuable function within such a group would be peer mentoring, similar to
          the mutual assistance within Alcoholics Anonymous.

              StockTickr (www.stocktickr.com) has been active in facilitating
              trading groups and communities, with an eye toward improving
              performance.

               Even if you just find one or two supportive peers to share ideas and
          results with, you’ve taken an important step to create a fresh, interpersonal
          context for the changes you’re trying to make. If you choose your peers
          wisely, they will challenge you, support you, learn from you, and teach you.
          Because you value them and don’t want to let them down, you’ll be more
          likely to stick to your preparation, discipline, and goals.
               A little-appreciated piece of psychological wisdom is to find social
          contexts to be the person (trader) you want to be. Over time, the feedback
          and responses from others will mirror the best of you to you and that ideal
          self will become an increasing part of you. When you’re your own trading
          coach, you don’t need to do everything yourself. A cardinal principle under-
          lying the psychodynamic framework is that the best changes are the result
          of powerful, emotional relationship experiences.
               Your assignment is to find just one person to be part of your team:
          someone whose developmental efforts you can support, and someone
          who will support your own. Out of that relationship may spring many
          more—a network of dedicated professionals mentoring and motivating
          each other. When you turn trading into a relationship experience, you gain
          role models, become a role model, learn from others, and benefit from
          teaching others. You add fresh ways to experience your strengths, even as
          you build on them.


                     COACHING CUE

          Online trading rooms are excellent venues for meeting like-minded traders,
          and they can be powerful learning tools. Several long-standing ones are Linda
          Bradford Raschke’s trading room, which emphasizes technical trading across
          multiple markets (www.lbrgroup.com); the Market Proﬁle–oriented Institute of
          Auction Market Theory room run by Bill Duryea (www.instituteofauctionmarket
          theory.com); and the trading room run by John Carter and Hubert Senters (www.
          tradethemarkets.com). Also take a look at the Market Proﬁle–related educational
          programs run by Jim Dalton and Terry Liberman (www.marketsinrproﬁle.com)
          as possible venues for connecting with like-minded traders. Two well-known

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          150                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH


          trading forums are Elite Trader (www.elitetrader.com) and Trade2Win (www.
          trade2win.com). Both can be ways of sharing information with other traders and
          connecting with peers. For those developing trading systems, the community
          that has developed around the TradeStation platform (www.tradestation.com)
          is worth checking out. Indeed, if you have a favorite trading platform or ap-
          plication, connecting with others who are using the same tools can be quite
          valuable. Market Delta (www.marketdelta.com) runs educational programs for
          users and maintains a Web presence for users, as does Trade Ideas (www.trade-
          ideas.com); these are two trading applications I’ve found useful.



          LESSON 47: TOLERATE DISCOMFORT

          An important insight from psychodynamic psychology is that our
          defenses—the ways we cope with the pain from past patterns of
          conflict—can take a physical manifestation. Consider a trader who is
          caught in a losing position. He watches, tick after tick, as the trade grinds
          against him. Gradually, he becomes tenser: he hunches over the screen,
          tightens his neck and forehead muscles, and grips his mouse tightly. This
          physical tension can be seen as a defensive strategy. This strategy cuts off
          other, threatening physical and emotional experiences. Perhaps the trader
          would love to yell and curse, but is afraid to lose control. Perhaps the trader
          just wants to cry, saddened by a series of needless losses. Not wanting to
          seem weak, he holds back the tears with his tension.
               There are many other physical manifestations of defense. Consider the
          trader who is conflicted about acting on a well-researched trading signal.
          As his anxiety mounts, he tells himself that the market is too uncertain and
          he walks away from the screen, only to find that his signal was valid after
          all. His avoidant defense—leaving the situation—temporarily defuses his
          nervousness, but it also keeps him from figuring markets out and acting on
          opportunity.
               Still another physical defense occurs when traders act out of frustra-
          tion, pounding a table, throwing their mouse, or cursing loudly and blaming
          unseen others for their losses. By venting their feelings, they avoid intro-
          spection and self-responsibility. Their defense is against the guilt and the
          awareness that they have been hurting their portfolios.

              Often we use our bodies to keep our feelings out of sight, out of
              mind.

             One of my subtle defenses is that, when I sense a position isn’t going
          my way, I’ll begin a frantic scan of information to validate my idea. Of

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      151


          course, I’m defending against the feeling of being wrong and I’m looking
          desperately for reasons to stay in the trade and undo the loss. This reaction
          generally makes the situation much worse. I’ve learned that if I’m behaving
          frantically in a trade, there’s usually good reason for my feelings and I
          need to listen to them.
               Recall that in psychodynamic theory defenses are coping strategies
          that protect us from the emotional pain of past conflicts. One of the most
          basic defenses is repression: keeping thoughts, feelings, and memories
          out of conscious awareness so that they cannot trouble us. The problem
          with repression, of course, is that a conflict repressed is a conflict that
          remains unresolved. We can’t overcome something if we remain unaware
          of its presence. Many traders use their bodies to repress their minds:
          their physical tension binds them, restricting the physical and emotional
          expression of feelings. I’ve met traders who were quite tight physically
          and yet who had no insight into the degree and nature of their emotional
          stresses. In an odd way, getting tense was their way of coping: they were
          always mobilized for danger, tightly keeping themselves in control. It is
          difficult to stay in touch with the subtle cues of trading hunches—the
          implicit knowledge we derive from years of pattern recognition—when
          our bodies are screaming with tension and even pain.
               In your self-coaching, it takes more than a willingness to inter-
          rupt these defensive patterns to make the most of them. What is also
          needed is the ability to focus on the feelings being defended against. The
          questions you want to ask yourself are: “What feelings am I holding off
          when I’m tensing my muscles?” and “What am I trying to avoid by blaming
          others or by walking away from the screen?” The idea is to hold off on that
          defense—purposely relax the muscles, turn the focus inward, stay in front
          of the screen—and simply experience the feelings that are threatening.
               In psychodynamic work this is known as facing or confronting one’s
          defenses. In counseling, for example, a client might begin talking about
          her painful relationship experiences and then suddenly change the topic
          and begin talking about her children and how they are doing in school.
          I might gently point out the change of topic to the client, explaining that
          it’s perhaps easier for her to talk about her children than about herself.
          She then resumes discussing her relationship, and new information—and
          a flood of feelings—comes forth, followed by memories of her bad relation-
          ship with her father. Breaking through the defenses leads to an emotional
          breakthrough: she becomes aware of suppressed and repressed feelings
          and their depth.
               Psychodynamic therapists are quite familiar with this phenomenon:
          when you get in touch with repressed thoughts, feelings, and im-
          pulses, the result is a fresh emotional awareness of your situation. Your
          perspective changes when your emotional state and awareness change.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          152                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          This shift often leads to new insights and new inspirations for dealing with
          difficult conflicts.

              When you feel in new ways, you often see in new ways as well.

               This emotional work can be conducted effectively through guided im-
          agery. If you vividly imagine a market situation that leads you to tense up
          or lash out in frustration, you can reenter your frame of mind at that time
          and see what it feels like to not engage in those defenses. Very often a dif-
          ferent set of feelings will emerge in the situation: ones that you hadn’t been
          aware of. For example, when you refuse to shout and blame others, you
          may find that you feel saddened for yourself, pained at your losses. This
          frees you to address the pain and support yourself, rather than bury the
          feelings beneath a show of anger.
               Enhanced emotional awareness can lead to a feeling of empowerment,
          not greater distress. A good psychodynamic counselor or therapist will
          challenge our defenses, not letting us get away with the various strategies
          we use to keep difficult feelings at bay. What results is awareness that the
          feelings we’ve been avoiding are not so devastating after all. Perhaps at
          one time in life, when we were young and more vulnerable, we couldn’t
          cope with those feelings and had to do our best to erase them. Now, as ma-
          ture adults, we don’t have to run. Feeling our most threatening emotions
          and seeing, at the end of it all, that we had nothing so terrible to fear after
          all is a tremendously powerful and empowering experience.
               So what are you running from? Think of your worst trading patterns
          as defensive maneuvers: actions you’re taking to ward off emotional
          pain. Then, when you refuse to act on those patterns, just sit with the expe-
          rience and see what you feel. See if you can find a different way to handle
          that feeling. Very, very often, beneath our impulsive trading, our anxious
          avoidance of risk, our outbursts, and our mismanagement of risk are ef-
          forts to protect us from a painful emotional experience. Once you find that
          experience and contact those feelings, you find there’s nothing to run from.
          You can handle loss, fears of failure, and disappointment. As your coach,
          you only need to prove that to you.

                     COACHING CUE

          Massage can be an excellent tool for reducing physical tension, but also for
          learning about your body’s pattern of tension. When you become more aware of
          your body, you can catch yourself tensing muscles and restricting your breath-
          ing and then make conscious eﬀorts to relax. When you relax in this manner
          by loosening muscles and deepening breathing, you are opening yourself to
          emotional experience—and new ways of handling your feelings.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                        153


          LESSON 48: MASTER TRANSFERENCE

          When I was in graduate school, I entered psychoanalytic therapy during
          my internship year in New York. The therapist’s office was in his home
          in a typical Manhattan high rise. Many of the issues I wanted to work on
          pertained to rebellion against authority, a pattern that appeared in various
          work and school settings. I generally tried to please those who supervised
          me. If I couldn’t win their approval, I became quite rebellious. I particularly
          did not like the feeling of being controlled by others. If there was a hint of
          coercion in a working relationship, I pushed back—sometimes quite hard.
              When I arrived at my therapist’s office, I noticed that the keys had
          been left in the door. I pocketed the keys, knocked on the door, met my
          therapist, and began the session. A few minutes into the session, the ther-
          apist’s wife—mortified to interrupt our session—entered the office to ask
          her husband if he had the house keys. I reached into my pocket, smiled at
          her, and handed them over with a wink. Not a bad start for a first session.
              Well, you don’t have to be a Freudian to have a field day with my ther-
          apy session, even apart from the sexual symbolism of the keys. I had the
          keys and I had control. When the wife needed something, I was the one to
          give it to her.
              To my therapist’s everlasting credit, he responded very well to the situ-
          ation, didn’t get defensive, but also didn’t ignore the matter. He encouraged
          me to join him in reflecting on what had happened and why it happened.
          That’s the psychodynamic way: you use your relationship as a medium for
          dealing with repeated conflicts from the past.
              What the therapist recognized, of course, was transference. Transfer-
          ence, in psychodynamic jargon, refers to the transferring of conflicts from
          the past to the present day. In other words, I was reacting to my therapist
          the way I might have reacted to my father or boss.
              Had the therapist become hostile and defensive (reactions he would
          have been entitled to, given that I had pocketed his keys!), I would have
          stayed in my rebellious stance. Indeed, such a reaction by the thera-
          pist would likely have fallen into the trap of confirming my worst fears
          about authority figures. By refusing to budge from his professionalism, he
          disconfirmed my expectations and took himself out of the authority role.
          That gave me the space to take a look at what I was doing in this and other
          relationships and why I was doing it. Eventually I came to recognize that
          my need to take control in relationships stemmed from weakness and fear,
          not from strength. I learned that I could achieve far better control by using
          my relationship skills to engage people constructively.

              The curative force in psychodynamic work is the use of the rela-
              tionship to create new, positive, powerful emotional experiences.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          154                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               It is not unusual for traders to personalize markets. Sometimes we
          view markets as dangerous, as out to get us, as rigged games, as treasure
          chests, as playgrounds, or as complex puzzles. When we attribute human
          characteristics to markets, we have to ask ourselves why we choose some
          qualities over others. Just as I projected authority onto my therapist, we
          project the qualities we most struggle with onto markets. This is a kind
          of transference. If we’ve lived for years with the sense that no one listened
          to us, we now feel that markets are irrational and capricious. If we’ve felt
          that others have taken advantage of us, we may just focus our frustration
          on the market makers who manipulate markets to our detriment.
               The idea of transference suggests that what most frustrates us about
          markets is most likely to be something that has frustrated us in our
          past—and probably in relationships. In a very important sense, we have
          relationships to the markets we trade, and it’s not unusual for us to im-
          bue those relationships with the same qualities that bedevil our personal
          relationships. When we act out past patterns with current markets, we’re
          no longer responding to objective demand and supply; lost in our own pat-
          terns, we become blind to those of our markets.
               We can see examples of transference in our dealings with trading
          partners as well. Very often, how a trader interacts with me reflects how
          she is dealing with markets. Some traders will avoid interaction with me
          out of embarrassment due to recent losses. These same traders enact
          avoidant patterns in their trading, neglecting to limit losses, neglecting
          their preparation. Other traders take a helpless stance with me during
          coaching, almost begging to be spoon-fed answers rather than trying
          methods out for themselves. These same traders become passive in
          difficult markets, giving up readily, displaying little resilience after normal
          losses. One advantage of sharing your trading with a peer mentor or a
          group of like-minded traders is that you can monitor how you engage them
          and how they deal with you. Not infrequently, the patterns that show up in
          your dealings with traders will reflect the patterns you need to work on in
          your trading. Patterns of overconfidence, avoidance, rationalization—all
          come out in our social interactions.


              Your greatest shortcomings in dealing with relationships will find
              expression in markets.

               How do you view the markets you trade? What do you say about mar-
          kets when you’re most upset about trading? If you were to draw a picture
          of your markets or describe them to a nontrader, how would you depict
          them? A worthwhile assignment is to review your journal and track your
          self-talk for anything you might say to personalize markets and trading.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         155

               As your own trading coach, you have the ability to create your own
          trading experiences. By controlling your risk exposure, executing trades
          only when there is a favorable reward-to-risk ratio, and limiting your se-
          tups to clear, tested patterns, you have the opportunity to create trading
          experiences that don’t follow the transference script—much as my thera-
          pist refused to accept the role I had cast for him. If your problem is handling
          frustration, your challenge is to create manageable frustrations in how you
          approach markets. If your pattern is escapism, your task is to find safe ways
          of staying in trades, in accordance with plans.



              Create trading experiences in which you can safely face your fears
              and constructively give voice to frustrations. That experience pro-
              vides new endings to old scripts.



               When we project hated qualities onto markets, we divide ourselves.
          Part of us fights the trading process and part of us is tries to stay absorbed
          in it. Thus distracted and divided, we are less able to pick up on market
          patterns and shifts among those.
               There’s a saying traders use: “Let the market come to you.” What that
          implies is that you should approach markets with an open mind, process-
          ing patterns as they unfold. This means being free of projections, free
          of conflicts that we transfer to our trading. By tracking how you talk
          to markets—and about them—you can step back from those repetitive
          themes and truly let markets come to you.



                     COACHING CUE

          You can see from the foregoing discussion why it is so important psychologically
          to reduce your trading size/risk when you are experiencing trading diﬃculties.
          This provides a safe context for trying out new ideas and tweaking your meth-
          ods, so that you can face market problems directly and constructively rather
          than respond with defensiveness. When we make our trading more planned and
          rule-governed, we create experiences of control. When we reduce risk, we cre-
          ate experiences of safety. The essence of self-coaching in the psychodynamic
          mode is to generate new and powerful experiences that change how we deal
          with self, others, and world. Fashioning new trading experiences enables you to
          experience your trading and your markets in fresh ways that open the door to
          opportunity.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          156                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 49: THE POWER
          OF DISCREPANCY

          A cornerstone of the psychodynamic framework is that talk alone does not
          generate lasting change. Rather, as we saw in the last lesson, we change
          through new, powerful emotional experiences. These experiences are pow-
          erful precisely because they undercut our worst fears and expectations and
          show us that we can, indeed, master the past conflicts and feelings that
          were once overwhelming.
               We can think of this change process as generating new endings to
          old stories. Perhaps my old story is that I am fearful of loss, having been
          through traumatizing losses in my past, either as a trader or predating my
          trading career. Out of this fear of loss, I find it impossible to hold trades
          until their logical stop-loss or profit targets have been hit. Invariably I
          become so concerned with protecting a gain or minimizing a loss that I
          front-run my trading plan and exit early.
               Note that this pattern is a defensive one: I am trying to ward off the dis-
          comfort of loss by getting out of the market prematurely. The cost of that
          pattern is that I never fully participate in the upside of my ideas, leaving
          me to chop around in my P/L. As long as I continue to act on that pattern,
          I never stay in touch with that fear of loss and thus can never master that
          fear. Repeating the pattern simply reinforces it.
               So what we need in psychodynamic work is a new ending to the
          scenario. We need to refuse to indulge in the defense and purposefully sit
          in the trade, while allowing the feeling of fear to remain. The idea is that, at
          one point of time in our lives, this fear was too threatening to sit with. Now,
          however, at a new life period when you have more resources, you can
          handle the fear. You don’t need to continue to defend against it. Getting in
          touch with your basic conflict and its emotions—the things you have been
          most defending against—is crucial to the psychodynamic change process.
               The psychodynamic change process can be schematized as a sequence:

            r Identify your recurring problem patterns.
            r Connect yourself to the costs and consequences of those patterns.
            r Identify what those patterns are defending against (what you are
              avoiding).
            r Create experiences, particularly in relationships, for facing what
              you’ve been avoiding.
            r Repeat these experiences across different relationships to internalize
              new, constructive ways of coping.

             Your problems, this view emphasizes, are simply ways of protecting
          you from fearful memories, feelings, or desires. Once you experience

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                      157

          those fears and acknowledge them, the challenge is to channel the fear in
          a way that does not derail your trading plan. You could talk with a trading
          colleague to gain some perspective, perform some exercises to calm
          yourself down and reassure yourself, or use the opportunity to write in
          your journal and remain an observer to the anxiety rather than the one
          immersed in it.
               By refusing to act on the old defensive pattern, you guarantee your-
          self a psychologically helpful outcome. This is very important. As long as
          your position is sized properly with appropriate risk/reward in the place-
          ment of stops and targets, one of two things will happen: you’ll either
          hit your target and make your money or you’ll get stopped out at your
          predetermined level.
               While the latter scenario is less desirable than the first, neither sce-
          nario is catastrophic. By acting in a manner that is discrepant from your old
          pattern, you have created a win-win: either you make money, or you find
          out—in your own experience—that the loss was not so bad after all and
          nothing to fear. In some ways, it’s this latter experience that is the most
          helpful. By facing your worst-case scenario and seeing that it’s something
          you can, indeed, cope with, you generate a tremendous sense of confidence
          and mastery.


              Trading well is a powerful source of new, positive emotional
              experiences.


               There are many ways of constructing discrepant experiences. One is
          to surround yourself with people who respond differently to you than
          those from your past and let them be a part of the changes you’re work-
          ing on. They can then support you in not repeating old patterns, but also in
          providing positive feedback when you enact new, positive ones. Another
          way to generate discrepancy is to face uncomfortable situations directly,
          refusing to engage in old defensive maneuvers. Once you get in touch with
          the feelings you’ve been holding at bay, you’ll be surprised at how readily
          you can arrive at ways of coping with them that provide you with the new,
          constructive endings.
               A term used by psychodynamic therapists Alexander and French
          captures the essence of this approach: corrective emotional experience.
          What enables people to overcome their problem patterns is a set of
          emotional experiences that correct the learning that occurred during times
          of past conflict. It’s not enough to perceive a problem and think about
          it; as your own trading coach, you need to create experiences that en-
          able you to move past that problem. Invariably this means refusing to keep
          difficult feelings buried and, instead, experience them fully and face them

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          158                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          directly. When you see that you can live through your emotional worst-case
          scenarios and emerge with no lasting damage, that is the corrective emo-
          tional experience.
               Your assignment, then, is to conduct a personal experiment and seek
          just one corrective emotional experience during the trading day. Identify
          the repetitive trading behaviors that most disrupt your trading and then
          figure out what you would be thinking and feeling if you didn’t engage
          in those behaviors. When a situation arises in which you would normally
          repeat your pattern, make the effort to hold off and experience those feel-
          ings you identified. See what those feelings are like, see how you cope with
          them, and see how the new coping affects your trading. You may be sur-
          prised to find that facing your fears is the best way of moving past them.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you have a trading mentor, someone you respect and admire, try trading like
          that person just for one day. Do everything as you think they would do it. See
          how you feel with the discrepant experience, as the enactment forces you to
          forego your own negative patterns. In enacting an ideal pattern, you create new
          experiences with markets that undercut old, repetitive patterns.




          LESSON 50: WORKING THROUGH

          The term “working through” has a specific meaning in psychodynamic
          work. Once you have made initial changes—breaking old patterns of de-
          fense, facing challenging emotional conflicts, and finding new ways of
          dealing with those—the working-through process involves extending these
          gains by repeating the process across a variety of situations. As we’ve seen,
          repetition combats relapse: working a problem through a number of rela-
          tionship situations cements new, mature ways of handling core conflicts.
              A classic example is the trader who avoids closeness in relationships
          out of fear of rejection. Sure enough, in his relationship with his counselor,
          he transfers his past fears to the present relationship and avoids intimate
          topics. While this provides a superficial sense of safety, it prevents the
          trader from talking about what is truly important—and moving beyond it.
          Once the trader makes a conscious effort to open up in the sessions, the
          counselor provides the discrepant response by not being rejecting. This
          makes it easier over time to break the pattern with the counselor in future
          sessions and remain open.
              In the working-through process, the trader in our example would take
          the progress with the counselor and now apply it to other relationships, as

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008   13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                       159

          appropriate: friendships, close work relationships, and romantic relation-
          ships. By working through the conflict in multiple situations, new, positive
          patterns are cemented. The positive mirroring of many relationships en-
          ables the trader to internalize a sense of safety and security, which can
          be carried forward to a variety of life situations. In other words, it’s not a
          single corrective emotional experience but multiple such experiences that
          enable us to internalize a new sense of self.


              Successful self-coaching builds multiple corrective emotional ex-
              periences, so that new, constructive patterns can be internalized.

               After all, this really is the essence of psychodynamic work: redefining
          the self by creating and absorbing so many impactful, constructive experi-
          ences that it becomes impossible to remain stuck in the past. I internalized
          the identity of an author not just by writing articles and books, but also by
          interacting with editors and readers over time. There was a time when I
          sat in front of a blank screen in writer’s block mode, concerned that what
          I wrote would not find a receptive audience. Following multiple positive
          experiences with writings and readers, that is no longer a concern. The
          writing flows as naturally as conversation.
               Similarly, there may have been a time when you thought of yourself
          as a small, beginning trader. Over months and years of trading experience,
          making money and building your account, you no longer see yourself as
          a newbie. Through the positive experiences, you absorb the identity of an
          experienced, skilled trader. Think back to the process of expertise devel-
          opment from Enhancing Trader Performance: the steps that build skills
          are also the steps that construct identity. Working the learning curve, mov-
          ing from novice trader to competent trader to expert trader is more than
          building knowledge and skills. It is a transformation of self as the result of
          repeated, positive experience.


              Your training as a trader should provide ongoing corrective emo-
              tional experiences: training itself becomes a means of working
              through our shortcomings.


               When you’re at the point of working through, you want to be an ac-
          tive experience generator and tackle your patterns in as many situations
          as possible, giving yourself the opportunity to enact new ones. As prior
          lessons have emphasized, and as you’ll detect from the advice of experi-
          enced traders in Chapter 9, this is particularly powerful if you’re work-
          ing problems through with the support of trading peers. Their mirroring of

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:57    Printer: Yet to come




          160                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          your success, like the feedback that solidified my identity as an author, will
          enable you to literally take your changes to heart.
               Your efforts at self-coaching in the psychodynamic mode will find their
          greatest success if you can disrupt old patterns and enact new ones on a
          daily basis, with the active feedback of those you’re working with. Many
          traders I’ve known have sought to keep their specific trading performance
          secret, obviously embarrassed that they’re not making more money. They
          freely talk about winning days, but remain strangely vague or silent follow-
          ing bad ones. This is exactly the opposite approach to the one that will
          work for you. You want to be visible, warts and all, because that will
          help you—emotionally—put those warts into perspective. If your flaws
          (or your concerns about others’ reactions to those flaws) are so threaten-
          ing that you must hide them, then your defenses control you. When you
          can make yourself completely visible to others, you have nothing to hide.
          Their acceptance of you is complete and genuine, not a false reflection of a
          false self.
               A while ago, when I was posting my trades live to the Web via the
          TraderFeed blog, I invited readers to join me and post their trades as well.
          The daily count of unique visitors at that time was around 2,000; I figured
          that, even if just one-half of 1 percent took me up on the offer, we could
          get 10 different models of trading to learn from. Well, out of 2,000 people,
          only one showed tentative interest. No one was willing to go public with
          his trading.
               That, dear reader, is how losers react. If readers were taking a psycho-
          dynamic approach to change, they would freely share their trades in real
          time and make no effort whatsoever to maintain false selves. Over time,
          their progress would be evident and the massive positive feedback they
          would generate would cement a new identity, a deep sense of security, and
          an emotional fearlessness.


              Accountability provides powerful opportunities to work through
              our greatest insecurities.


               Your challenge for this lesson is to open the kimono and conduct your
          working-through socially, with the feedback of people you respect. This
          would be part of a daily trading plan, ensuring that you’re generating cor-
          rective emotional experiences every single day. Several traders I know
          have taken precisely that approach by starting their own blogs, posting
          their trades, and developing relationships with the traders who responded
          constructively to their ideas. Relationships are a powerful medium for
          change, perhaps the most powerful. If you harness the right relationships
          you will give your self-coaching a reality that transcends simple entries in
          a trading journal.

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:57     Printer: Yet to come




          Breaking Old Patterns                                                         161


                     COACHING CUE

          Find at least one person to whom you are accountable for your development
          as a trader. This should be someone you can trust in sharing your P/L, your
          trading journals, and your tracking ofpersonal goals. A major advantage en-
          joyed by traders at professional trading ﬁrms is that they are automatically ac-
          countable for performance and can thus openly discuss success and failure with
          mentors and risk managers. Accountability leaves no place to hide; it’s an ex-
          cellent strategy for combating defensiveness and removing the threat behind
          setbacks.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter 5:
          http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-five-links.html
               An excellent overview of psychodynamic approaches to brief therapy
          can be found in Hanna Levenson’s chapter “Time-Limited Dynamic Psy-
          chotherapy: Formulation and Intervention” in The Art and Science of Brief
          Psychotherapies, edited by Mantosh J. Dewan, Brett N. Steenbarger, and
          Roger P. Greenberg (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2004).
               A worthwhile resource for building emotional self-awareness is Leslie
          S. Greenberg’s Emotion-Focused Therapy: Coaching Clients to Work
          Through Their Feelings (American Psychological Association, 2002). See
          also the classic text by Leslie S. Greenberg, Laura N. Rice, and Robert
          Elliott, Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-by-Moment Process
          (Guilford, 1993).
               Articles relevant to psychodynamics and self-coaching can be found
          in the “Articles on Trading Psychology” section of my personal site:
          www.brettsteenbarger.com/articles.htm. These articles include “Behav-
          ioral Patterns That Sabotage Traders” and “Brief Therapy for Traders.”
               It is rare to find trading coaches who know anything about psycho-
          dynamics; a notable exception is Denise Shull, who wrote the chapter,
          “What Would Freud Say: Stroll Down Freud’s Mental Path to Profits” in the
          book edited by Laura Sether, The Psychology of Trading (W&A Publishing,
          2007).

P1: JYS
c05     JWBT039-Steenbarger   December 30, 2008   13:57   Printer: Yet to come




                                            162

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




                                     CHAPTER 6



                               Remapping
                                the Mind
                               Cognitive Approaches
                                 to Self-Coaching



                    The greater danger for most of us lies not in setting
                    our aim too high and falling short, but in setting our
                    aim too low, and achieving our mark.
                                                         —Michaelangelo



              n Chapter 5, we explored psychodynamic frameworks for self-

         I    coaching. These frameworks are especially relevant when we repeat
              unproductive patterns across a variety of situations over time. Funda-
          mentally, the psychodynamic view is a historical one: it emphasizes link-
          ages between how we coped in the past and how we now find ourselves
          responding to situations.
               The cognitive framework, like the behavioral one that we’ll visit in
          Chapter 7, is less historical: it emphasizes how we process the world in
          the here and now. Change the viewing and you change the doing is the es-
          sential message of cognitive approaches. While the past is not irrelevant to
          this task, cognitive self-coaching stresses what we can do in the here and
          now to alter how we process the world around us.
               Cognitive coaching is most relevant if you find yourself battling neg-
          ative thought patterns that interfere with your motivation, concentration,
          and decision-making. Some of the most common cognitive patterns that
          traders target for change include:
            r Perfectionism
            r Beating Up on Oneself After Losses
            r Worry
            r Taking Adverse Market Events Personally
            r Overconfidence

                                                                                     163

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          164                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Cognitive methods help us think about our thinking and restructure
          our perceptions of self and world . Let’s take a look how. . .


          LESSON 51: SCHEMAS OF THE MIND

          Chapter 5 outlined psychodynamic approaches to the change process. That
          framework makes use of powerful emotional relationship experiences to
          break patterns of behavior left over from prior life conflicts. When applied
          to self-coaching, the psychodynamic perspective requires a dual look at
          past and present, with an eye toward recognizing occasions when we re-
          peat the past in our current responses to trading challenges. The cognitive
          framework, on the other hand, is more present-oriented. Its focus is on how
          we think and the relationship between our thinking and the ways in which
          we feel and behave.
               The cognitive approach to change, like the behavioral methods de-
          scribed in Chapter 7, is grounded in learning theory. Instead of emphasizing
          the creation of relationship experiences, the focus is on skills building. For
          that reason, homework exercises play a prominent role in cognitive work,
          which makes the cognitive modality particularly useful for self-coaching.
          In cognitive coaching, you learn skills for processing information more
          constructively.
               Many cognitive psychologists draw on the analogy of the scientist
          when describing our thought processes. Scientists observe nature and look
          for patterns and regularities. Once scientists observed these relationships,
          they develop theories to explain their observations. Experiments test these
          theories and provide new observations that enable scientists to modify
          their theories. Over time, science arrives at ever more refined understand-
          ings of the world through the process of testing, observing, modifying, and
          testing further.
               Cognitive researchers call the theories in our head schemas. These
          schemas are like mental maps, orienting us to the world around us. We
          interpret events and interactions with others through these schemas, as-
          similating new events to them when possible and accommodating our
          understandings to fit new events when needed. As developmental psychol-
          ogist Jean Piaget explained, this process of assimilation and accommoda-
          tion provides us with deeper and richer understandings of our world. We
          are always elaborating our maps of reality.

              We never experience the world directly; all perception is filtered
              through our mental maps. If our maps distort the world, our per-
              ceptions will be distorted.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                         165


               Schemas are not just collections of thoughts, but are complexes of
          thoughts, feelings, and action tendencies. Let’s say, for example, that I was
          beaten severely as a child and now perceive the world as a dangerous place.
          One of my schemas might be that, “You can’t trust people; they’ll hurt you.”
          When others try to get to know me, that schema becomes a lens through
          which I view their behavior. Instead of responding with friendliness, I raise
          my guard and distance myself. Because of the schema, I’ve interpreted their
          behavior as dangerous.
               Sometimes schemas, as the lenses through which we view events, are
          distorted. They lead us to view and respond to events in exaggerated ways,
          as in the example above. Take the example of the trader who views his
          worth through his profit/loss statements. He becomes overconfident and
          expansive when he’s making money, and he turns risk-averse and self-
          doubting when he’s in a slump. As long as his trading results are filtered
          through this schema, he’s likely to think about and respond to his prof-
          itability in distorted ways.
               Problem patterns develop when our distorted responses to the world
          become self-reinforcing. In the example above, because others hurt me,
          I now perceive people as dangerous and untrustworthy—even when they
          approach me in a friendly way. My guardedness makes me seem hostile or
          suspicious to others, and they naturally stop their friendly overtures. That,
          in turn, convinces me that my views of them were right all along, reinforc-
          ing my distorted schema. When we are caught in such self-reinforcing
          patterns, we stop revising our mental maps: we become locked into neg-
          ative ways of perceiving—and responding to—the world.
               Automatic thoughts are the habitual ways of thinking that result from
          our schemas. Once a schema is triggered, it usually sets off a series of
          thoughts and feelings that guide our action. A schema of vulnerable self-
          worth might, for instance, lead us to respond to a market loss with dejec-
          tion and depression and a host of thoughts amounting to, “I’ll never suc-
          ceed.” These thoughts and feelings are not objective assessments of the
          markets or our trading. Rather, they are automatic, learned reactions that
          have become habit patterns.

              We never directly observe our schemas; rather, we experience
              their manifestations through our automatic thoughts.

              The goal of cognitive work is to unlearn these negative thought pat-
          terns and replace them with more realistic ways of viewing the world. This
          restructuring of our thinking means that we, like scientists, must revise our
          theories. The cognitive approach provides methods for accomplishing this
          revision.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          166                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              There are many automatic thoughts that affect traders as they struggle
          with risk and uncertainty. Some of these thoughts are:

            r “I need to make more money.”
            r “I’m so stupid; how could I have done that?”
            r “I’ve got this market licked.”
            r “I can’t afford to lose money.”
            r “The market is out to get me.”
            r “I’ve got to get my money back.”
            r “Nothing I do is right.”


               The first step toward becoming your own trading coach in a cognitive
          vein is to identify the thoughts that automatically appear during your
          trading. Several traders I’ve worked with have taken the unusual step of
          audio recording or videotaping themselves throughout the trading day and
          then reviewing the recording after the close of trading. It’s a great way to
          identify the recurring thoughts and feelings associated with trading chal-
          lenges. Many times, there are just one or two core automatic thoughts that
          dominate our experience. These are the thoughts that will form the initial
          focus of your coaching efforts.
               Your assignment is to observe yourself in trading with either video or
          audio recording, making notes of recurring thoughts and feelings. At first,
          don’t worry about changing these thoughts: simply observe how your mind
          is occasionally hijacked when events trigger particular schemas. It is cru-
          cial that you understand, from your own first-person experience, that you
          do not have complete freedom of will or mind. At times, all of us can be
          quite robotic, replaying thoughts that have become mere habits. By observ-
          ing these habitual thought patterns, you begin the process of separating
          yourself from them.



                     COACHING CUE

          Our most problematic automatic thoughts often come out when we’re fa-
          tigued and/or overwhelmed. Think back to times when you’ve felt overloaded
          with work, responsibilities, and market challenges. What are the thoughts that
          go through your mind? How do those thoughts aﬀect your feelings and be-
          havior? Observing yourself when you’re most psychologically vulnerable is a
          great way of clearly seeing the negative thought patterns and schemas that
          aﬀect us.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                            167


          LESSON 52: USE FEELING TO
          UNDERSTAND YOUR THINKING

          One of the best ways to identify the automatic thinking that could most
          jeopardize your trading is to track your strongest feelings. In the cognitive
          framework, how we feel is a function of our perception: how we see things
          and how we interpret what we see shape our emotional responses. When
          our interpretations of events are extreme, we’re most likely to respond with
          extreme feelings. Those occasions in which we look back at our behavior
          with embarrassment, wondering how we could have blown things so out of
          proportion, are most likely reflections of times in which we were controlled
          by the automatic thoughts from distorted mental maps.
               If, say, I think about the times in which I most completely lose my
          temper, they would be occasions in which I want to accomplish something
          but find my path blocked for no apparent good reason. Perhaps I’m trying
          to get to an appointment on time and find myself behind a slow driver who
          is absorbed in a cell phone call. Or it could be a situation in which I’m trying
          to accomplish something with a trader at a firm, but find myself stymied by
          a bureaucratic response. The thought behind my temper outburst is, “I have
          to get this done, now!”
               Often these are situations that aren’t life or death: they don’t truly need
          to be accomplished there and then. My schema says, however, that if some-
          thing doesn’t get done now, that would be awful; it would be a catastrophe.
          I am responding to my own internal should and must, not to the objective
          demands of the situation. The exaggerated emotional response is a tip-off
          to an entrenched thought pattern that distorts my perception.

              When we turn a desire into a demand, we mobilize the body and
              respond with stress.

              In psychodynamic work, the focus would be historical: figuring out
          past relationship patterns that might have initiated my particular way of
          thinking and feeling. The cognitive framework, however, is less concerned
          with the origins of the thinking patterns than on what we do in the present
          to recognize and modify those. By tracking our extreme emotional re-
          sponses as they are occurring, we can learn to recognize the thought pat-
          terns that affect us in the present and eventually challenge these. In the
          cognitive approach, this is accomplished literally by teaching yourself to
          think differently and filter the world through a different set of lenses.
              For example, when I pressure myself about time and tasks that I want
          to accomplish, I recognize the mounting frustration and tell myself that

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          168                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          this is going to get me nowhere. A different perspective on the situation is,
          “What’s the worst that could happen? Will this really be a catastrophe?” By
          pushing myself to entertain the worst-case scenario, I see how foolish it is
          to get worked up. Rarely is the likely consequence commensurate with the
          extent of the pressure I’m placing on myself. That, after all, is what makes
          the schema distorted!

              When we change the lenses through which we view events, we
              change our responses to those events.

               What are your most exaggerated emotional responses to markets? Do
          you feel angry when ideas don’t work out; devastated after losses; stricken
          by fear during volatile periods? Or perhaps you swing from overconfident,
          cocky feelings to feelings of despair and worthlessness? Your strongest
          feelings are reflections of your most entrenched thought patterns, and
          those feelings reflect your core schemas:
            r Schemas of justice—“I put in my work; I should make money.”
            r Schemas of catastrophe—“It would be terrible if my trade didn’t
              work out.”
            r Schemas of safety—“I can’t act; the market is too dangerous.”
            r Schemas of self-worth—“I’m a total failure; I can’t make money.”
            r Schemas of rejection—“I’ll look like such a fool if I can’t succeed at
              this.”

               It’s easy to see how these schemas naturally lead to exaggerated emo-
          tions of anger, frustration, fear, and depression. As your own trading coach,
          you want to use your most extreme feelings to figure out your most dis-
          torted ways of viewing yourself and your trading. If you’re managing risk
          properly, there should be nothing overly threatening about any single
          trade or any single day’s trading. If you find yourself responding to mar-
          kets with a high degree of threat, then you know that the problem is not
          the markets themselves or even your trading, but the interpretations you’ve
          placed on your trading results.
               Please read those last two sentences again, slowly. If you are trad-
          ing well—with plans built on demonstrated edges, with proper risk
          control—trading will have its stresses, but should not be filled with dis-
          tress. Markets cannot make us feel anxious, depressed, or angry; the threat
          lies in how we view our market outcomes.
               One exercise I like to conduct when I find myself responding to trad-
          ing with strong emotion is to simply ask, Am I reacting to the situation as
          it really is, or am I reacting to what I’m telling myself about the situa-
          tion? That question forces me to confront my thinking and ask whether the

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                             169

          magnitude of my emotional reaction is truly warranted. If it is not the ob-
          jective situation that creates your feelings, then your emotion has to be
          internally generated, a function of how you are processing events. If the
          emotion is out of proportion to the situation, your thinking about the situ-
          ation must be distorted.

              The greater the distortion in our thinking, the greater the distortion
              in our emotions.

              Make yourself write down what you would have to say to another
          person—another trader—to make them react the way you’ve just reacted.
          What could you say to them that would lead them to respond so extremely?
          The odds are good that what you would tell another person to generate the
          emotion is what you are telling yourself:

            r “You’re no good!”
            r “It’s all your fault!”
            r “You’re going to lose your money!”
            r “You can’t win!”

              If you write down these messages every time you catch yourself in the
          throes of an extreme emotional response, you’ll come close to duplicating
          the output from your cognitive schemas. It’s much easier to redraw mental
          maps when they’re lying open in front of you.


                      COACHING CUE

          A common thought pattern that distorts traders’ reactions to markets is what
          we might call a “justice schema”: the idea that markets should be fair, should of-
          fer opportunity, or should behave as they’ve behaved in the past. Once we lock
          ourselves into notions of how markets should behave, we open ourselves to frus-
          tration and disappointment when they take their own course. Many times, I’ve
          seen traders grow restive, fuming at markets that just aren’t moving. Traders
          become impatient and jump all over any move to new highs or lows, hoping that
          this will be the breakout move—only to ﬁnd the market return to its slow range.
          By challenging yourself when you catch yourself thinking or talking about how
          the market should behave (but isn’t behaving), you can use the frustration to
          channel your energies elsewhere: toward longer time frames in the same mar-
          ket, toward fresh research, or toward other instruments or markets. When we
          react to our own sense of justice and injustice, we no longer objectively process
          actual market activity.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          170                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 53: LEARN FROM YOUR
          WORST TRADES

          Alcoholics Anonymous teaches people to become aware of their stinkin’
          thinkin’. But we don’t have to be alcoholics to process the world in dis-
          torted ways. We develop repetitive patterns of behavior, and we follow
          daily routines. Most of us are creatures of habit: we tend to go through
          consistent morning routines, eat at the same times of day, and go to sleep
          around the same hour. We take the same routes to and from work, and
          we listen to the same music, watch the same television shows. There’s not
          much in our lives that isn’t patterned.
               So it is with our thinking. We learn ways of processing information,
          and these become part of our routines. We blame ourselves to help avoid
          conflict with others; we anticipate negative outcomes to help us not be-
          come surprised when things go wrong. In individual situations, such modes
          of thinking may suit us well. As engrained habit patterns, however, they im-
          pose distortions upon the world. After all, not everything really is our fault.
          Not every event does go poorly.


              Our negative thought patterns are learned habits; the key to cog-
              nitive work is unlearning them and replacing them with more con-
              structive ways of processing events.


               Once these modes of thinking become automatic, their accompanying
          feelings follow along. When we blame ourselves, we feel discouraged, di-
          minished, and depressed. When we anticipate the worst, we feel anxious
          and uncertain. To the extent that we bring these schemas to trading, we no
          longer respond to markets objectively. We are like robots, responding with
          automatic thoughts and unwanted feelings.
               As Gurdjieff noted, it is important to become emotionally aware of this
          reality: At some point you’re deeply absorbed in trading, observing market
          patterns, and acting upon those. Then a shift occurs, and you are no longer
          in control of your thinking. It has become hijacked. An activated schema
          now sets off an avalanche of thoughts and feelings that may very well have
          nothing to do with the situation at hand. Suppose someone hijacked your
          computer as you were trading and suddenly switched the screen from your
          markets to some other, random ones? Suppose your mouse was taken out
          of your control and clicked on trades that you didn’t want?
               I guarantee, if that happened to you, you’d become very upset. You
          would not tolerate someone controlling your computer or your mouse. You
          would do everything in your power to regain control of your equipment.
          That has to become your attitude toward the hijacking of your mind. It’s not
          enough to simply observe automatic thoughts taking control; you need to

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                           171

          feel the horror of literally losing control of your mind and behavior. Much
          of the motivation to change faulty schemas will come from the awareness
          of the pain they inflict in all aspects of your life.

              Automatic thoughts don’t just enter our mind; they take over. We
              change when we sustain the motivation to stay in control of our
              minds.

               We’ve seen that reviewing your self-talk via audio or video recording
          and tracking your most extreme emotions during trading can alert you to
          your stinkin’ thinkin’. Another powerful tool to help identify problematic
          schemas and thought patterns is to review your absolute worst trading de-
          cisions. Your worst trading decisions may or may not be your largest losing
          trades; they could be occasions in which you simply missed a golden op-
          portunity. You’ll know your worst trading decisions by your reaction to
          them, “How could I have done that?” That reaction is a fantastic tell, indi-
          cating that you truly were not in your proper mindset when you made the
          poor decision. At some level, when you’re mystified how you could have
          been so mistaken or boneheaded, you are recognizing that your mind had
          been hijacked.
               Once you identify these worst trades—and this will require a review of
          your journal, as well as a look back on your recent trading experience—you
          then want to re-create the thoughts and feelings that led to the faulty
          decision-making. Normally we like to put such episodes behind us, with
          a simple reassurance that next time we’ll trade with better discipline and
          preparation. But in this exercise, you want to perform a psychological au-
          topsy and exhume your faulty decision-making process in all its gory detail.
          What were you thinking at the time? What were you feeling? What were you
          trying to avoid or accomplish with your trading decision?
               The common thoughts and feelings during these poor trading
          episodes will be your clue as to the schemas that were being activated
          at the time. Perhaps it was a safety schema: you were telling yourself that
          you could not afford to lose paper profits or to take a particular risk. Alter-
          natively, it could have been a self-worth schema, as you told yourself how
          great it would be if this trade hit a home run. Your feelings during these
          trades—the fear, the overconfidence—will provide valuable clues as to the
          automatic thoughts that were generated.

              Our worst trades come from reacting to our automatic thoughts
              instead of markets themselves.

               In my own trading, a common schema that is activated is a variation
          of the safety theme: avoid danger. To be sure, this can be a useful mode at

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          172                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          certain market junctures, helping a trader size positions appropriately and
          limit losses on trades. Where the schema introduces distorted perception,
          however, is in defining danger as any drop from an equity peak, not as an
          outright loss of capital. This makes it particularly difficult to stay in win-
          ning trades, because relatively small retracements will stimulate desires
          for profit taking. A more realistic perspective would define danger not only
          in terms of lost paper profits, but also in terms of lost opportunity. Some
          of my worst trades have been ones in which I acted on a short-term per-
          spective and subsequently missed the longer-term market move. The need
          to avoid danger exposed me to the equal danger of cutting profits short.
               Notice that these worst trading episodes cut across patterns of think-
          ing, feeling, and behaving. Once we start from the (faulty) premise, “You
          must avoid risk,” and once we define risk as any market movement
          against our positions, we shape our feelings and actions accordingly.
          Reviewing your worst trades may be painful, but it is also liberating. It tells
          you where your mind has gone astray, and that can lead you to corrective
          action.


                     COACHING CUE

          Many of our worst trades come from the demands we place on ourselves. Keep
          tabs of the times you tell yourself that you need to, must, and have to par-
          ticipate in market moves or make money. When these demands become rigid
          absolutes, we end up chasing market moves, refusing to take small losses, and
          otherwise violating principles of good trading. When we are more focused on
          those internal demands than on our trading rules, that’s when we’re most likely
          to lose money. You’ll be able to identify those demands by the internal feel-
          ing of pressure that they generate. There’s a diﬀerent feeling when you trade
          from opportunity versus trade from pressure. Track your worst trades and the
          feelings associated with them to alert you to the ways in which your automatic
          thoughts can sabotage your best trading.




          LESSON 54: USE A JOURNAL
          TO RESTRUCTURE OUR THINKING

          Review your past emotional episodes and trading mistakes as a helpful way
          to identify your mental maps and the ways in which they can distort your
          perception. The goal of cognitive work, however, is to be able to catch
          your automatic thoughts—those bouts of stinkin’ thinkin’—as they are oc-
          curring so that they cannot hijack your mind and your trading.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          173


               In Enhancing Trader Performance, I outlined how a cognitive journal
          can be used to help traders restructure their thought processes. The journal
          format I suggested took the form of a single page for each trading day or
          week (depending on the frequency of your trading), with each page taking
          the form of a table. The left-hand column of the table describes the events
          that occurred at the time you experienced a trading problem. This column
          would include what was happening in the market, what you were planning,
          and how you entered—or didn’t enter—the market.
               The second column is an account of how you are talking to yourself
          about the problem. In the book, I took the traditional approach of using
          the second column to describe your beliefs about the events. What may
          be most helpful to your self-coaching, however, is to actually transcribe
          your thoughts about the events and capture what you’re thinking and
          feeling. This column should capture the ideas going through your head at
          the time as faithfully as possible, as in, “Why didn’t I take the trade when I
          had it? I should have been up money today and instead I’ve lost more than
          I should. I am so disgusted with myself. I don’t know if I even want to keep
          trading.”
               Many times, key phrases from your transcribed self-talk will alert you
          to the nature of the schemas being activated. For instance, in the example
          above, the word should is often a good sign that a perfectionist self-worth
          schema is playing itself out, leading to angry self-talk and a discouraged
          frame of mind. Once the musts and shoulds are triggered, they turn the
          trader’s attention away from markets and toward the issue of self-worth.
          Note that this is not happening in a constructive context; rather, the self-
          talk is critical and punitive. It is difficult to see how such thinking could
          move a trader forward.
               I like to think of these automatic thoughts from the second column as a
          kind of tape recorder in the brain that clicks on during particular situations
          (first column). Many times, the very same phrases and messages recur from
          situation to situation. This process becomes easy to observe when review-
          ing your cognitive journal: you see not only how negative the self-talk can
          be, but also how automatic and robotic it is.


              Pay particular attention to emotional words and phrases that recur
              in your self-talk: These words and phrases are shaped by our core
              schemas.

              The third column describes what happens as a result of the self-talk:
          the feelings you have and the actions you take. For instance, in the exam-
          ple above, those angry, perfectionist thoughts might lead you to quit for
          the day and sulk, missing opportunity and a chance to learn about current

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger        December 29, 2008      14:16       Printer: Yet to come




          174                                                         THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          markets. Alternatively, the angry self-talk might lead to subsequent revenge
          trades that lose even more money. The third column chronicles all the con-
          sequences of the automatic thinking, both personal and monetary.
              Over time, a review of this third column will cement for you the abso-
          lute toll taken by the distortions in your thinking. When you are your own
          trading coach, it’s necessary to sustain your motivation for change. Seeing
          that your thinking is both tape recorder-like in its mechanicalness and sab-
          otaging in its consequences will sear into your mind that change is not op-
          tional. Reading entries from day after day after day that highlight the same
          thoughts, the same behaviors, and the same losses and lost opportunities
          focuses not only the mind, but also the motivation for change.
              The most common mistake traders make in keeping such a journal
          is that they are not sufficiently specific in their entries and thus miss
          crucial details and understanding. Below is a sample of a journal that
          lacks detail and fails to help the trader understand the specific thought
          patterns and consequences that appear across various trading situations:

          Situations                    Self-Talk                     Consequences

          Didn’t go over my charts in   I need to get my rest         Missed a good move
          the morning
          Sized my trade too large      This could be a great         Took a large loss
                                        trade
          Market moved through my       I’m losing too much           Took a break
          stop                          money
          Didn’t take proﬁt on a        I think we’re going lower     Market reversed
          trade
          News came out                 Stock is really moving        Stock failed to rally; I quit
                                                                      for the day


              Now let’s take a look at the same cognitive journal, but with detailed
          entries.

          Situations                    Self-Talk                     Consequences

          I was tired because I had     “I have to get my rest, but   I couldn’t see the market
          been partying late at night   I’ll be able to ﬁgure         well. I missed an
          and didn’t go over my         things out after the open.    opportunity that I had
          charts before the open.       I’ve got a good feel for      researched last week, but
                                        the market”                   forgot about once the
                                                                      market opened. I could
                                                                      have made several
                                                                      thousand dollars on that
                                                                      trade.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 29, 2008          14:16      Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                                   175


          Situations                     Self-Talk                    Consequences

          I thought I had a good idea    “This could be a great       An economic report came
          after I missed the morning     trade. If it goes for me,    out and the market moved
          trade. I doubled the           it would make my day.        against me. I didn’t
          position size to make up       Maybe it was a good          remember that the report
          for the lost trade.            thing I missed that          was coming out. I panicked
                                         trade.”                      and sold out for a several
                                                                      thousand-dollar loss. This
                                                                      put me in the red after a
                                                                      good start to the month.
          Right after the big loss, I    “I’m losing my shirt         I decided to take a break
          saw that gold was moving.      today. If this keeps up,     from trading, but I couldn’t
          I went with it, but it         I’ll be so far down for      relax. I was worried about
          reversed and blew through      the month that I won’t       coming home and telling
          my stop.                       be able to come back.        her about my day.
                                         There’s no way I can
                                         explain this to my wife.”
          I had a winning trade in the   “I can’t aﬀord another       The solar stocks reversed,
          solar stocks, but decided      losing day. This trade       and I only took a small proﬁt
          to hold the position past      can make me even on          on the position. I feel totally
          my proﬁt target to make        the day; then I’m going      stupid for ignoring my exit.
          my day back.                   home. I have to stop
                                         doing this to myself.”
          One of the stocks on my        “This is going to break      The stock stalled near the
          list was favorably             out of its range; it could   top of its range and then
          mentioned by an analyst        go much higher. I want       broke through on high
          and popped on the news. I      to be on board, but I        volume. I watched the stock
          decided to not take the        can’t aﬀord to lose any      move without being on
          trade, because I didn’t        more.”                       board. I feel totally
          want to lose more money.                                    disgusted with myself, like I
                                                                      don’t deserve to trade any
                                                                      more.



              Note how the added detail makes it clear what is going on in the
          trader’s mind. The elaboration of the trader’s self-talk also clarifies the
          links among the events, as one trading mistake led to another, with one
          schema (self-worth) first triggering overconfident thoughts and feelings,
          then frustrated ones, then ones of defeat and failure. We can also see how
          the trader’s home life is connected to the thoughts and feelings affecting
          trading decisions, as the trader is feeling a need to prove himself to his
          spouse as well as to himself.
              When you are your own trading coach, you want to look between the
          journal entries as well as within each of them. That will often illustrate

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          176                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          the links among your thoughts, as events trigger distortions in process-
          ing, which bring further events, and still additional distortions. Your as-
          signment is to capture the flow of your thoughts and the connections of
          these to your feelings and actions. Only once you clearly see how the men-
          tal dominoes fall can you interrupt the process by turning your mind in a
          different direction.


                      COACHING CUE

          What are the schemas and thoughts that accompany your best trades? Extend-
          ing your journal to include how you think when you’re trading very well helps
          you take a solution-focused approach to cognitive work. The last lesson in this
          chapter may provide some ideas along this line. Also keep an eye out for the
          hope schema, in which trades that are losing money trigger automatic thoughts
          of hope for a return to breakeven. Those thoughts often lead to violation of stop-
          loss rules and trigger subsequent schemas of regret and self-blame. There’s a
          role for intuition in trading, but beware situations in which you are into wishin’.
          Those are usually excellent points to get ﬂat and regain perspective. When you
          are your own observer, your negative thoughts can themselves become reliable
          trading indicators.




          LESSON 55: DISRUPT NEGATIVE
          THOUGHT PATTERNS

          How do you break a habit pattern? When we have a smoking habit, or when
          we find ourselves eating out of habit, one of the first steps toward change
          is simply catching ourselves in the act of repeating our unwanted actions.
          By disrupting a habit pattern, we gradually make it less automatic, less
          capable of controlling us.
               So it is with our habitual thought patterns. When we interrupt and dis-
          rupt these patterns, they become less automatic. We gain a measure of
          control over them; they no longer take control from us.
               The most basic technique to disrupt negative thought patterns is
          thought-stopping. Thought-stopping is exactly what it suggests: a con-
          scious effort to stop a train of thinking while it is occurring. When you
          have used cognitive journals and reviews of your trading to clearly iden-
          tify your pattern of automatic thoughts, you become increasingly sensitive
          to their recurrence. This enables you to recognize their appearance in real
          time. By giving yourself the command to Stop!, you disrupt the automatic
          nature of the thinking. This gives you time to calm down, change the focus
          of your attention, and engage in other useful cognitive exercises.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          177

              A good example from the previous lesson is situations in which
          you find yourself losing money on a trade and hoping or praying for a
          turnaround. I’ve even encountered traders who engage in a kind of bargain-
          ing (not unlike the dynamics of someone facing death in the Kubler-Ross
          work), promising to never violate their discipline again if they could just
          break even on this trade. The fact that hope is dominating the cognitive
          picture for the trader suggests that there is more than a little desperation.
          At some level, the trader is aware that this is not a good position to be
          holding. The underlying schema, however, says that it is not okay to lose
          money; that losing money equals failure. This makes even normal market
          losses unduly distressful, triggering maladaptive coping (holding positions
          beyond stop-loss points out of hope; doubling down on losing trades). If,
          however, the trader recognizes this pattern as it is occurring, he can use
          the appearance of hope to stop himself and disrupt the automatic thoughts
          and actions.


              The more vigorous your efforts at stopping, the more successful
              you’ll be in disrupting unwanted patterns of thought and behavior.

               Thought-stopping is useful because it separates you from your ways
          of thinking. Instead of identifying with automatic thoughts and the feelings
          they engender, you separate yourself from them and remind yourself that
          this is what has gotten you into trouble in the past. In the beginning, as you
          coach yourself, you will find that you have to engage in thought-stopping
          numerous times during a trading day. As you become more expert at rec-
          ognizing your negative thoughts and disrupting them, however, you find it
          easier and easier to stop yourself. A simple reminder of, “There I go again!”
          is sufficient to turn your mind to a different track. The interruption of ha-
          bitual thoughts itself becomes a positive habit pattern.
               I have found it helpful in my own trading to make the stop efforts par-
          ticularly impactful, almost as if I’m shaking myself awake and mobilizing
          other ways of dealing with situations. One time I caught myself holding a
          winning trade beyond the point at which it had reversed and returned to
          breakeven. A cardinal rule I’ve learned to follow is to not allow trades that
          have moved a threshold amount in my favor to become losing trades. As I
          watched the winning trade hit breakeven and then turn red, I caught my-
          self hoping that it would return to breakeven. The order flow was clearly
          suggesting, however, that large traders were hitting bids and driving the
          market lower. I gave myself a swift slap across the cheek and told myself
          to get out. That spontaneous act—admittedly not a coaching technique I
          use with other traders—woke me up and enabled me to take a small loss
          rather than a much larger one. However, I have remembered that slap over
          the years, and its impact has kept me out of trouble on multiple occasions.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          178                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          (Now I take a break from the screen and douse my face in cold water when
          I need to shift how I’m thinking about markets. The physical jolt seems to
          facilitate a cognitive shift.)

              When the thought-stopping is dramatic, the mind-shift can be
              equally radical.

               Some traders I’ve worked with have found it useful to post signs on
          their computer monitors to remind themselves of the thoughts they most
          want to stop. Stay Humble is one sign a trader wrote after identifying a pat-
          tern of overconfident, arrogant thinking. Such signs help traders to think
          about their thinking, standing apart from the patterns that would normally
          trigger negative emotions and poor trading decisions. They also remind
          traders to periodically stop, interrupt automatic thought patterns, and reen-
          gage markets constructively. You can’t be absorbed in a pattern of thinking
          if you’re making yourself its observer.
               Here is a simple thought-stopping exercise that I have found useful in
          my own trading. The idea is to be on the lookout for any thoughts during
          trading that include the words I or me. The goal is to interrupt and dis-
          rupt those thoughts. The reason for this is that you don’t want to be self-
          focused when you’re concentrating on markets. You neither want to be
          thinking overly positively about yourself and your performance or overly
          negatively. When your automatic thinking turns attention inward, that’s the
          cue to immediately disrupt the pattern and become more market focused.
               There are many examples of self-directed attention that divide your
          focus from markets. These include:
            r “I’m doing great; this is the time to be aggressive.”
            r “I can’t believe how badly I’m trading.”
            r “Why did I just do that?”
            r “The market is killing me.”
            r “I’m going to make my money back.”
            r “Everything I do is wrong.”
            r “I hate this market.”
              Once the words I or me appear, you want to quickly close your eyes,
          take a deep breath, relax your muscles, and turn your attention to the mar-
          kets. If you’re already worked up to that point, a quick break from the
          screen—clearing your head and turning your attention elsewhere—can be
          useful.

              I find it helpful, during trading, to periodically remind myself, “It’s
              not about me.”

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                           179

               With practice, you can become quite good at proactively steering your
          mind from self-focused thoughts. During one recent trading episode, I
          caught myself looking up my P/L in the middle of a trade, wondering how
          well I was doing and how much I was willing to give up of my week’s gains.
          Of course, that had nothing whatsoever to do with the merits of the trade I
          was in. Because of prior practice, I was able to stop myself from clicking on
          the P/L summary before the numbers could get into my head. Reminding
          yourself that “it’s not about me”—it’s about the markets—is an excellent
          start to maintaining control over your decisions in the heat of market ac-
          tion. If you stop yourself from doing the wrong things, you clear the decks
          for implementing sound trading practices.


                     COACHING CUE

          When I work with traders, one of my roles is to help them stop the ﬂow of neg-
          ative, automatic thoughts. Even when you’re coaching yourself, however, you
          can derive the same beneﬁt by keeping in touch with one or more trusted and
          valued trading peers during market hours. This can be in a single trading oﬃce
          or via Skype, Hotcomm, or even instant messaging. Many times your mates will
          pick up on your negative thinking before you’re aware of their appearance. This
          can be very helpful in checking yourself and refocusing your attention.




          LESSON 56: REFRAME NEGATIVE
          THOUGHT PATTERNS

          Reframing is a psychological technique that takes a problem pattern and
          places it in a different context so that it can be viewed in fresh ways, open-
          ing the door to new responses. Suppose I’m meeting with a trader who is
          experiencing occasional bouts of performance anxiety that leave him un-
          able to act on clear trading signals. He views himself as a weak person who
          can never succeed at trading. I take a different perspective, emphasizing
          his prudence about taking risk and his success at avoiding large losses.
          “Perhaps we can use that same good judgment to identify and act upon op-
          portunity in a way that keeps you secure,” I suggest. What the trader frames
          as weakness, I reframe as a potential strength. Instead of fighting against
          his own tendencies, the trader can use the reframing to help him figure out
          how to use those tendencies to produce acceptable risk-adjusted returns.


              Often we can find a strength underlying one of our weaknesses,
              enabling us to approach problem patterns in novel ways.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          180                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Reframing can often take a negative motivation and turn it positive. For
          a while, it seemed to me that my daughter was lazy in getting her school-
          work completed. I then hit on the idea that her primary motivations are
          social in nature: she’s a real people-person. I proposed that we do home-
          work together, and she readily rose to the occasion. This became a father-
          daughter tradition during the school year and a valued bonding experience.
          Similarly, when my son angrily confronted a teacher at school who “got in
          my face” about getting work done quickly, I started my conversation with
          him by congratulating him for using words only and not storming out of
          the class or laying hands on the teacher. Instead of framing the discipline
          problem as a failure experience, I reinforced the important lessons of self-
          control. He was much more able to hear my later advice, and he left the
          incident feeling better about himself, having learned from the confronta-
          tion. The most negative thought patterns are there for a reason; identi-
          fying that positive reason and finding new ways to accomplish it makes
          self-coaching empowering.
               Consider, for example, the example of the trader who becomes lost in
          hope during a losing trade. Instead of flaying him for a lack of discipline,
          I will emphasize that he has found a valuable market indicator: the Hope-
          Meter. When hope enters the picture during a trade, it’s a sign that deep
          down we know the trade is ill fated. By following the Hope-Meter, we can
          use the automatic thinking pattern to aid good trading, rather than interfere
          with it.


              When you see problems in new ways, you gain the ability to
              respond in new ways. Novelty is a central element in all change
              efforts.

               Many problems have a cyclical nature: I am afraid of losing money, so
          I set my stops too tight, lose more money on choppy action, and generate
          even more fear of losing money. When we reframe a problem, the new per-
          spective can help us break the cycle. If I reframe the problem as one of
          position sizing, I can take the same monetary risk with wider stops, break-
          ing the cycle of loss in choppy markets. How we view our patterns very
          much determines how we respond to them.
               A useful exercise that I described in The Psychology of Trading is to
          reframe our inner dialogues by viewing them as actual dialogues. What we
          say to ourselves sounds very different when we imagine the same words
          spoken by someone else. This is particularly true when we are hard on our-
          selves after losses. What feels like worry when we are absorbed in our own
          thoughts sounds more like hostility when we reframe the same messages
          as part of an interpersonal dialogue.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                           181


              Let’s say a trader misses a good trade and then tells herself, “I can’t
          believe I missed that trade. What is wrong with me? I wait all week for the
          right setup and get it handed to me on a silver platter and I don’t take ad-
          vantage of it. I’m never going to make it if I keep making mistakes like this.”
              Many traders actually consider such self-talk to be constructive.
          Traders think that being hard on themselves will help them avoid simi-
          lar mistakes in the future. Suppose, however, we reframe the very same
          conversation as a dialogue from a friend to the trader:
              “I can’t believe you missed that trade. What is wrong with you? You
          wait all week for the right setup and get it handed to you on a silver platter
          and you don’t take advantage of it. You’re never going to make it if you
          keep making mistakes like this.”
              Clearly, when the dialogue is framed in such a manner we can appre-
          ciate that the tone is not at all constructive. Indeed, no true friend would
          ever talk to us in such a manner. The message is blaming and hostile, with
          no empathy or suggestions for improvement. Reframing the self-talk as an
          actual dialogue reveals the true emotion behind the automatic thoughts.

              Reframing thoughts as dialogues helps us view our thinking in a
              new light.


               Such reframing is particularly effective if we imagine ourselves speak-
          ing to a good friend in such a manner. For instance, suppose a good friend
          of yours went through a series of losing trades and you were to say to that
          friend, “I can’t believe you missed that trade. What’s wrong with you?” We
          can be hard on ourselves and buy into all sorts of hostile ways of talking
          to ourselves, but if we imagine delivering those same messages to a friend,
          we don’t buy into the scripts at all. When we reframe our thoughts as inter-
          actions with a friend, we draw upon personal strengths such as our ability
          to be supportive of others. Such strengths make it impossible to maintain
          a stance of angry blaming.
               As your own trading coach, you want to maintain a consistent and
          constructive tone of voice with yourself, so that you don’t damage your
          concentration or your motivation. An excellent exercise for working on
          this process is to close your eyes and imagine yourself as another trader
          that you are responsible for: perhaps an assistant or a student trader. Imag-
          ine that this valued assistant of yours has just made the same mistakes
          in the market that you’ve made. How would you talk with this person?
          What would you say? What would be your tone of voice? What emotions
          would you convey? Imagine these in as vivid detail as possible. Then note
          how your approach to this other trader differs from your own self-talk. If
          you wouldn’t talk to a valued colleague in the way that you’re addressing

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          182                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          yourself, then you know that your automatic thinking is distorted in a neg-
          ative way. Surely you deserve to talk to yourself the way you would talk
          with others in a similar situation!

              Many times it’s the tone of our self-talk, not just its content, that
              disrupts our trading.

              When you conduct this guided imagery exercise day after day, partic-
          ularly after you’ve interrupted some of your negative thoughts, you grad-
          ually learn to talk with yourself in more positive ways. In one variation of
          the exercise, I have traders imagine that they are the other trader they are
          talking to, so that they literally are practicing talking to themselves in ways
          that they would support someone else they cared about. During these ex-
          ercises, traders who have been the most volatile and angry can access a
          wealth of caring, supportive messages as they view themselves as people
          they truly care about.
              You are your own trading coach. Do you want your coach to berate
          you, to focus on your every mistake, to threaten you with dire conse-
          quences? Or do you want your coach to bring out the best in you? When you
          cast your thoughts as dialogues, you have a chance to reframe the mental
          maps that guide your thinking, feeling, and acting. Inevitably, we do talk to
          ourselves. We are coaching ourselves. The only question is whether we do
          so consciously and constructively or automatically and destructively.

                     COACHING CUE

          If you have a mentor or peer trader who you are working with, pay particular
          attention to how they talk to you when you are having problems. Many times we
          can internalize the voices of others in reframing our automatic thought patterns.
          “What would my mentor say to me?” or “What would a good coach say to me?”
          is an excellent start toward constructive reframing.




          LESSON 57: USE INTENSIVE GUIDED
          IMAGERY TO CHANGE THOUGHT
          PATTERNS

          The value of imagery is that it stands in for actual experience, with an un-
          usual power to access emotional responses. Here is an effective cognitive
          exercise that makes active use of the emotional power of imagery.
              The first step in the exercise, as emphasized in recent lessons, is to
          identify the repetitive, automatic thoughts that are disrupting your trading.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          183

          As noted earlier, these thoughts will generally form the self-talk that ac-
          companies your most emotional trading episodes. The clearer you are in
          your capturing this self-talk, the more realistic and vivid your imagery work
          will be.
               Let’s take a specific example. A trader I recently worked with uncov-
          ered a pattern that was greatly holding him back in his success. He was a
          profitable trader over many years, but always had the nagging feeling that
          he was not fulfilling his potential. When we examined his trading and think-
          ing patterns, it became clear that he became more risk-averse as he hit new
          peaks in his trading account and new P/L highs for the day. He was upset to
          finish off his highs (for the day, for the week), so he became unusually risk-
          averse as he hit these highs. He cut his size, traded less often, and behaved
          like a person who had just undergone a drastic drawdown.
               His self-talk at these times was revealing. “You’ve had a good day,” he’d
          tell himself. “Let’s hang onto the gains. There will be more opportunity
          tomorrow.” When it became clear that he missed opportunity because of
          this unusual caution, he felt vaguely guilty, but he reassured himself that
          his equity curve was positive and “you never go broke taking a profit.”
               This was a difficult pattern to break because, while the trader realized
          the pattern’s limitations, he also bought into it at an emotional level. The
          trader who beats himself up truly suffers as a result of his self-talk and
          will want to change that, simply to feel better. The risk-averse thinking,
          however, kept our trader feeling safe. He liked the consequences of over-
          caution: it helped keep his emotions in check.


              We are less likely to change a pattern if we buy into it, if we’re not
              in at least a moderate amount of distress over the consequences of
              that pattern.

               A key step in changing his self-talk was to reframe the “let’s not lose
          money” talk as “I don’t think I can make money” talk. The trader thought
          of his self-talk as messages of safety; I reframed them as messages of low
          self-confidence. He doesn’t want to finish off his highs, because at some
          level he’s not sure that he can get past those peaks. He doubts his ability
          to bounce back from drawdowns, so he desperately tries to avoid drawing
          down. He settles for a steady, but modest equity curve because he doesn’t
          have confidence that he can generate and sustain more robust returns. Per-
          haps he even feels, deep down, that he does not deserve large rewards.
               Note how, in this situation, my reframing was not a way of helping a
          trader view a negative pattern more constructively; rather, I was framing
          the pattern in a way to accentuate the trader’s discomfort. It’s back to that
          notion that coaching is all about comforting the afflicted and afflicting the
          comfortable. Our trader was far too comfortable in his risk-averse ways;

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          184                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          my goal was to move him forward in his readiness for change by helping
          him highlight the costs of his ways of coping. In your own cognitive self-
          coaching, you are not simply reframing negative thought patterns posi-
          tively; you also will frame them in ways that summon your motivation for
          change. Earlier, I mentioned the value of viewing negative patterns as per-
          sonal enemies: this is an example of a reframing that afflicts our comfort.
               When I reframed his self-talk as a lack of confidence, the trader’s im-
          mediate response was to describe his mother. He loved her and felt close
          to her as a child, but said that she was overprotective. When other boys
          went out to play, she held him back, afraid he would into fights. She tried
          to dissuade him from dating later in life, because she thought that girls
          might “take advantage” of him. The trader explained, with some sadness,
          how he never had the opportunity to excel in sports despite early promise,
          because his mother worried about injuries.
               This response provided me with the opening to use the guided imagery
          method. I asked the trader to close his eyes and vividly imagine a situation
          in which he has made money early in the day and now is considering pack-
          ing it in for the day and sitting on his profits. I told him to imagine that the
          markets were moving and opportunity was present, but to visualize his
          mother saying to him everything he has been saying to himself during
          his risk-averse self-talk. He thus had to imagine his mother, with a wor-
          ried, overprotective look on her face, warning him to not trade, to not lose
          the money he made, to not get hurt in the markets.


              Personalizing a pattern you want to change can heighten your mo-
              tivation to change that pattern—and help you sustain that motiva-
              tion.

               Before we had finished the exercise, the trader opened his eyes and
          exclaimed, “Yuck!” The idea of being a little boy controlled by his mother
          disgusted him. “But isn’t that your mother talking,” I asked, “when you’re
          telling yourself to not lose your money, to not get hurt in trades? Isn’t that
          your Mom’s voice within you?”
               That reframing was what the trader needed to separate himself from
          his pattern. The last thing he wanted to do was repeat his overprotec-
          tive childhood. Whenever he felt uneasy about participating in a market
          with opportunity, he simply closed his eyes and visualized what his mother
          would say in that situation. That visualization gave him the motivation to
          push the negative thinking aside and act on his trading instincts.
               As I noted in The Psychology of Trading, most of us have someone in
          our past who we don’t like or who we associate with negative thoughts and
          influences. If you imagine your least favorite person—someone who was
          mean to you, who hated you, who was abusive to you—saying to you what

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                            185

          you have been saying to yourself in your worst self-talk, it will become
          much easier to push back. If that hated person were actually standing in
          front of you while you were trading, voicing negativity, you’d have no trou-
          ble telling him to shut up. When you use imagery to associate your worst
          thinking with the worst people from your past, you learn to shut yourself
          up. And that is a major triumph of self-coaching!


                      COACHING CUE

          There are many other powerful applications of imagery in combating negative,
          automatic thought patterns. One trader I worked with took up martial arts and
          used the workouts to imagine striking out against the patterns that had held
          him back. After he rehearsed that mind frame in practice after practice, he only
          needed to adopt certain postures during the trading day to regain his ﬁghting
          form. Another trader found that he was sharpest in his trading when he felt
          physically ﬁt. He used his exercise routines to rehearse ways of thinking about
          himself and trading that reinforced his strengths. During the midday, he took
          a short exercise break, which helped clear his mind, but also placed him in
          greater touch with the mindset that he was cultivating. Not all eﬀective imagery
          is visual; sometimes associating a way of thinking with a physical state can help
          us use body to aﬀect mind.




          LESSON 58: CHALLENGE NEGATIVE
          THOUGHT PATTERNS WITH THE
          COGNITIVE JOURNAL

          One way to use a cognitive journal, we have seen, is to track automatic
          thought patterns, so that you can become highly aware of negative self-talk
          and how it is connected to your emotions and behavior. A simple extension
          of the journal, however, is useful in restructuring our mind maps.
               In the journal described earlier, we divided pages into three columns,
          with the first column representing a description of situations in which
          automatic thoughts occur; the second column captures the self-talk; and
          the third column highlights the consequences (in mood, behavior, trading)
          of that self-talk. The added fourth column represents your systematic ef-
          forts to change the internal dialogue and replace the automatic, negative
          thoughts with more realistic, constructive alternatives.
               Let’s start with an example. Suppose a trader is dealing with a perfec-
          tionist pattern in which she frequently criticizes her performance as not
          good enough. Even when she makes money, she focuses on how much
          she left on the table by not catching highs and lows. The result leaves her

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008        14:16      Printer: Yet to come




          186                                                        THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          feeling discouraged, and it also leads her to take bad trades in order to try
          to catch exact highs and lows.
               In the fourth column of her journal she engages in a Socratic debate
          with those negative thoughts, challenging them and coming up with dif-
          ferent ways of viewing the situation. This is truly self-coaching, because,
          just as the second column is the voice of the negative self-talk, the fourth
          column becomes the voice of the inner coach.

              The cognitive journal can become a forum in which we vigorously
              and emotionally challenge our most negative thought patterns.

              Here are sample entries and what they might look like:

          Situation            Self-Talk            Consequences            Coaching Talk

          I lost money when    “I don’t know        I felt down all         “This rate hike was
          markets reversed     what I was           morning and took        not expected;
          on the surprise      thinking. I’m so     too little risk in my   c’mon, I can’t
          rate hike and my     stupid to be         next trades, even       anticipate
          stop was hit.        trading when         though they were        everything. I had a
                               there’s a chance     good ideas that I       high probability
                               of news coming       had conviction in.      idea and kept the
                               out and hurting                              losses well within
                               me.”                                         planned limits.
                                                                            That’s a trade I
                                                                            should always take.”
          I got out of a       “Why can’t I stay    I ﬁnished the day       “This is just my
          winning trade too    in good trades?      feeling rotten          frustration talking.
          early, and the       The only way I’ll    instead of feeling      The market had
          market ended up      make money is by     good about the          been choppy all day;
          moving ﬁve points    holding winners. I   money I made. I         it’s part of my plan
          further in my        could have made      was in a bad mood       to take proﬁts more
          direction.           so much more         all evening.            quickly in choppy
                               money.”                                      markets. Give me a
                                                                            break; I got a good
                                                                            price and made a
                                                                            nice proﬁt. Beating
                                                                            myself up is just
                                                                            going to ruin my
                                                                            next trades.”


               Notice how the fourth column, the trading voice, is close to what
          you might say to someone else who might be going through your situ-
          ation. It is an attempt to provide a perspective that is not so blaming and
          self-critical. As with other parts of the journal, it’s important that this fourth

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                              187

          column be detailed, so that you have an opportunity to really think about
          and absorb the alternative view. Writing, “I shouldn’t be so hard on myself,”
          is less effective than writing, “This is the same kind of talk I heard from the
          boss at my old job who couldn’t stand me. I hated him, and I hate how
          he treated me. I don’t deserve this and I’m not going to do it to myself.” It
          is also effective to elaborate the negative consequences of the automatic
          thinking in that fourth column: “This kind of thinking has interfered with
          my trading all year long. I’m not going to let it cost me any more money!”

              You want to counter your automatic thoughts with emotional
              force; it is the emotional experience of challenging your ways of
              thinking that will cement the new patterns.

               The reason the journal is effective is that it provides a regular, struc-
          tured opportunity for you to take the self-coaching role: it’s a great way
          to practice mentoring yourself. The use of the journal may feel artificial at
          first, but—with repeated entries—you’ll begin to internalize that coach’s
          voice and start challenging your negative thinking as soon as it pops up.
               The cognitive journal also offers an excellent tool for reviewing your
          trading, particularly if you add a simple fifth column and track your prof-
          itability each day and/or grade the quality of your trading for that day. That
          column enables you to see how your progress in changing your self-talk is
          related to your trading progress, adding to motivation. Another alteration
          to the framework is to create an audio journal, so that all of your entries
          are spoken out loud in real time. This not only helps you restructure your
          thinking during breaks in the trading day, it also provides a useful day’s end
          review and cements your lessons.


                      COACHING CUE

          Where traders often fall short with the cognitive journal is in making it more
          of a logical exercise than a psychological one. Traders challenge their negative
          thoughts in a calm, rational manner, but that doesn’t carry emotional force. The
          research literature in psychology suggests that we process emotional material
          more deeply than ordinary thoughts. You want to make your challenging of
          negative thought patterns into an emotional exercise where you vigorously re-
          ject the thinking that is holding you back. It helps to keep in mind that these are
          the thoughts and behaviors that have sabotaged your trading, cost you money,
          and threatened your success. If there was a person posing such a threat to you,
          you would surely confront him and reject his inﬂuence. When you personalize
          your automatic thoughts, you can create more powerful emotional experiences
          that aid the restructuring of your perception.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          188                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               As your own trading coach, you want to use tools such as the journal
          in a way that helps your trading, not that becomes burdensome. It takes a
          bit of experimentation to see how the journal best fits into your workflow
          and routine. An excellent rule is that you won’t make significant progress
          until the time you spend in the self-coaching mode exceeds the time you
          spend in the throes of negative, automatic thinking. The journal is a useful
          way to ensure that you get that coaching time.



          LESSON 59: CONDUCT COGNITIVE
          EXPERIMENTS TO CREATE CHANGE

          If people are like scientists, who construct their theories of the world based
          on their observations and experience, then it should be possible to treat
          their expectations as hypotheses that could either be confirmed or contra-
          dicted. When you generate new observations and experiences that discon-
          firm negative thought patterns, you gradually modify those patterns and
          eliminate their distortions.
               Sometimes just a review of recent experience in a Socratic dialogue
          can be enough to challenge and modify negative views. “Whatever I do in
          the market is wrong!” might be one negative thought that automatically
          kicks in when the trader is losing money. A simple review of recent re-
          sults, however, may bring the trader back to reality: “Wait a minute. I’ve
          had some excellent trades this week. I need to step back and figure out
          what’s working for me.”
               When you’re in the midst of negative thoughts, we’ve seen that it helps
          to take the role of the observer and ask, “Is this really true? Is this what I
          would be saying to someone else in my shoes? Is this what I would want
          someone else to be saying to me right now?” By disconfirming those nega-
          tive thoughts, you make them less automatic—less able to take control of
          your decisions.
               Sometimes, however, constructing specific experiments to challenge
          your negative thoughts and expectations can provide the right experience
          to jar and reshape your beliefs. One trader I worked with insisted that di-
          versification didn’t matter to him; he just wanted to be right on his trades.
          When he saw a good idea in a sector, he bought every name in the group,
          piling into the trade. Of course, the stocks moved in a correlated way; he
          probably would have been just as well off if he had bought the sector ETF
          and had saved some commissions. His thought pattern, “This is a great idea;
          I have to go all in,” led him to risk a large amount of his capital on a single
          idea, even as he tried to convince himself that he was diversified because
          he held many names in his book.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          189


              For this trader, good enough wasn’t good enough. He couldn’t view his
          trade as a success unless it was a home run. For every home run he hit,
          however, he took a harrowing loss, leaving him discouraged and worried
          about his future. His pattern of needing to be “all in” to make his money
          back was taking an emotional as well as financial toll.
              I suggested that we try an experiment. The gist of the experiment was
          that he had to divide his capital into four equal segments. No more than
          one segment, at his normal leverage, could go into any single trade idea.
          Thus, if he thought gold was going up, he could use up to a quarter of his
          normal buying power to buy the gold ETF and/or to buy gold miners. If
          he bought five names among the mining stocks, that quarter of his buying
          power would be divided among the five. To utilize the other quarters of
          his buying power, he needed to have different ideas. For instance, while
          he was long gold, he might have a short position on an individual stock or
          sector because of unfavorable news that had just been released.

              An experiment, properly constructed, can provide a power-
              ful, firsthand disconfirmation of our schemas.

               What this meant, of course, was that our trader wouldn’t be using all
          his buying power all the time, because he wouldn’t always have four truly
          independent (noncorrelated) ideas. When he did deploy a good amount of
          his capital, it would be evenly distributed among setups and ideas. Some
          would be devoted to short-term scalps; other money would be used for
          longer-time-frame ideas. Some would be long; some might be short. This
          process would even out his returns, enabling him to benefit from the fact
          that he tended to have more winning trades than losers. By eliminating the
          large losers through diversification, the trader could actually take less risk
          (experience lower volatility of daily returns) and make more money.
               The trader agreed to the experiment for a week. “What do I have to
          lose?” was his attitude. During the week, however, he actually saw that he
          made more money than he had during any week of the past several months.
          This result convinced him to continue the experiment. “I don’t need to be
          banging my head against the wall,” he explained after a few weeks. He was
          making more money—and he was happier doing it. Had he not actually
          conducted the experiment, however, he wouldn’t have truly known—in his
          own experience—how wrong his thinking had been. Pointing out the de-
          structiveness of a negative thought pattern (and the benefits of a more pos-
          itive one) is one thing; actually seeing it for yourself and experiencing the
          difference is far more powerful.

              The successful self-coach creates powerful and vivid experi-
              ences that undercut old habit patterns.

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          190                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              A common myth held by traders is that they need to be hard on
          themselves to maintain their motivation. This is another situation where
          a week’s experiment can be helpful: make a conscious effort to stay con-
          structive and positive every day for a week, and let’s see how you feel and
          how you trade. When a trader sees that when he gives up the negative pat-
          tern he actually improves his concentration and the process of his trading,
          he gains considerable incentive to extend the experiment.
              Your assignment, as your own trading coach, is to create a simple
          experiment—even if it’s just for the span of a single day—in which you
          disrupt the negative thought patterns you’ve identified and just see what
          happens to your mood and your trading. If you don’t like the results of
          the experiment, you can always go back to old ways and retool. If, how-
          ever, you find that you can focus on trading better, that you stick to your
          plans better, and feel better about your work as a result, then you can de-
          cide to extend the experiment in time and perhaps also to other facets of
          your life. Our negative thought patterns have been the result of learning;
          surely we are capable of acquiring new ways of viewing our trading and
          ourselves. Well-constructed experiments provide us with the catalyst for
          changing that viewing—and that can change our doing.


                     COACHING CUE

          Every trading rule can be turned into a cognitive experiment: See what happens
          when you follow the rule religiously—your trading results, your mood, and your
          decision-making. Many times, traders harbor fears in the backs of their minds
          as to negative consequences of sticking by their rules. By constructing exper-
          iments around the rules, we can see, ﬁrsthand, that these consequences are
          manageable and nothing to be feared.




          LESSON 60: BUILD POSITIVE THINKING

          The lessons for cognitive coaching thus far have emphasized ways to iden-
          tify and restructure negative, automatic thoughts. What, however, of pos-
          itive thought patterns? How can we become more intentional in building
          these? Fortunately, many of the cognitive techniques that work well to un-
          learn negative thought patterns can also be used effectively to cement pos-
          itive ways to view self and world.
               Note that the positive thinking we’re looking to build is not necessarily
          positive in the superficial sense. Look into a mirror and tell yourself how
          you’re the best trader, how you’re going to make so much money, etc. This

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:16     Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                            191

          process is not positive thinking; it is delusional. It also reinforces unrealis-
          tic expectations, setting traders up for disappointment.
               Rather, positive thinking is thinking that leads to constructive re-
          sponses to challenging situations. For instance, a trader may make a rookie
          error and might chide himself for the mistake, using the incident to firm up
          his execution and attention to detail. This is very positive. A trader might
          also simply tell himself, “You’re really not trading well; you can do better
          than this.” That might be an accurate assessment and a prod toward greater
          motivation.


              Positive thinking is not necessarily optimistic thinking; it is con-
              structive thought.

               How do you know the schemas and thinking patterns that are best for
          you and your trading? Fortunately, we can create a customized cognitive
          journal precisely for this purpose. Recall that in the traditional journal, the
          first column describes specific incidents of problematic trading; the sec-
          ond column summarizes the self-talk associated with the incidents; and
          the third column lays out the consequences of the self-talk. To create a
          format to track positive thinking, we use the journal to highlight episodes
          of positive trading. The first column describes what was happening in the
          markets at the time of the exemplary trading. The second column features
          the self-talk that occurred before and during these incidents; the third col-
          umn identifies how the self-talk contributed to good trading practice. In
          other words, you use the journal to highlight what you’re doing when
          you’re trading at your best.
               Observe that this doesn’t mean that you only focus on your profitable
          trades, though many of your positive journal entries will be profitable oc-
          casions. Rather, you want to focus on all occasions when you traded well,
          even if you took normal losses. For instance, if you took a trade with very
          favorable risk/reward but were stopped out at your preset level and later
          reentered the idea for a gain, which would be a very positive episode of
          trading. The role of the journal is to isolate the thought processes that en-
          abled you to keep your losses small and your trading flexible.


              The cognitive journal can be used to identify the best practices in
              our thinking and trading.


               One example of such a positive-oriented journal appears below. Once
          again, we are keeping the journal entries detailed so that we can crystal-
          lize in our minds the kinds of self-talk that are associated with our best

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger        December 29, 2008        14:16      Printer: Yet to come




          192                                                          THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          trading. Some of the most useful entries will come from occasions when
          we don’t make our usual mistakes and manage to break free of old, unhelp-
          ful patterns.


          Situation                    Self-Talk                       Trading Outcome

          The market gapped up at      “I’m afraid I’m going to miss   The market pulled back
          the open and continued       this move, but I’ve seen        more sharply than I
          to rise before I could get   what happens when I chase       expected and made a
          into the trade.              a runaway market. I’m going     feeble bounce. I saw that
                                       to wait for the ﬁrst pullback   the buying was not
                                       toward zero in the NYSE         continuing and actually
                                       TICK and then see if that       sold the bounce for a nice
                                       price level holds when I        scalp. Staying out of the
                                       enter on the next bounce.       market, being okay with
                                       It’s more important to get a    the possibility of missing
                                       good price on my trades         a trade, and sticking to
                                       than to be involved in every    my execution rules kept
                                       move.”                          me ﬂexible and made me
                                                                       some money.
          I was stopped out of a       “We just broke important        I waited for the ﬁrst
          trade within a few           levels in all the indexes. I    bounce and sold the
          minutes of entry, as         just paid for useful            market, riding the trade
          large selling pressure       information. The market is      down to the overnight
          entered the market           going to test its overnight     lows. I looked at the
                                       lows if we see continued        losing trade as a useful
                                       selling pressure.”              piece of market data
                                                                       instead of as a failure.
                                                                       That led to a good trade.


               Notice how the journal highlights the specific thoughts that led to the
          good trading decisions. By rehearsing this thinking, you can turn it into a
          positive set of habit patterns. Some of the best ways of thinking, I’ve found,
          have come from my interactions with successful traders. Talking with them
          has provided a model for how I can talk to myself during challenging trad-
          ing occasions. For instance, one trader set his entry price at a level that
          would ensure a favorable risk/reward for the trade and said, “The market
          has to come to me.” Instead of telling himself that he had to chase after
          opportunity, he insisted that he would only play when the market action
          fit his parameters. This kept him out of bad trades, but it also gave him an
          ongoing sense of control over his trading. It is difficult to feel stressed out
          by markets if you feel in control of your risk. I eventually adapted this way
          of thinking to my own entries, simply by never entering long trades on a
          high NYSE TICK reading and never selling the market on low readings. By

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          Remapping the Mind                                                          193

          making the market come to me, I found that I greatly reduced the heat I
          took on trades, maximizing profits. “The market has to come to me,” be-
          came one of my cognitive best practices.
               Your assignment is to identify the ways of thinking that put you into
          your best trades and that enable you to manage risk most effectively. Once
          you identify how you think at your best, you have a model that you can
          replicate day after day in your trading, turning virtues into positive habits.
          You don’t have to be mired in cognitive distortions to benefit from a cog-
          nitive journal. Use the journal as a discovery tool for your best practices.
          It’s an exercise even the most experienced, successful traders can benefit
          from.



                     COACHING CUE

          A trader I worked with used the phrase make them pay (and other, choice col-
          orful phrases) when he saw that the longs or shorts were overextended in a
          market. He would not exit until he saw evidence of high-volume puking from
          the traders running from cover. The idea of make them pay engaged his com-
          petitive instinct and kept him in winning trades. Frequently, he would add to
          his position on retracements, eager to make them pay even more. You may ﬁnd
          that you use similar phrases during your best trades. Cement those phrases
          into cognitive patterns that you can rehearse. The phrases keep you grounded
          in best practices.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the topic
          of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter 6: http://
          becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-coach-
          chapter-six-links.html
              More material on cognitive approaches to change can be found in my
          chapter on “Cognitive Techniques for Enhancing Performance” in Enhanc-
          ing Trader Performance. See also the chapter on “Cognitive Therapy: In-
          troduction to Theory and Practice” by Judith S. Beck and Peter J. Bieling
          in The Art and Science of Brief Psychotherapies (American Psychiatric
          Press, 2004). Of additional interest might be the article “Remapping the
          Mind” from the articles section of my personal site: www.brettsteenbarger.
          com/articles.htm

P1: JYS
c06     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     14:16    Printer: Yet to come




          194                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              I like books that interview successful traders and portfolio man-
          agers; these books provide positive models for how to view markets and
          trading decisions. Among the most popular are the Market Wizards books
          by Jack Schwager; Inside the House of Money by Steven Drobny (Wiley,
          2006), and Hedge Hunters by Katherine Burton (Bloomberg, 2007). Other
          models can be found in the writings of the contributors to Chapter 9: http://
          becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/contributors-to-daily-
          trading-coach.html. See also the Daily Speculations site (www.daily
          speculations.com) for interesting ways to think about markets and trading.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008    13:12    Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 7



                          Learning New
                         Action Patterns
                              Behavioral Approaches to
                                   Self-Coaching



                    Without self-knowledge, without understanding the
                    working and functions of his machine, man cannot
                    be free, he cannot govern himself and he will always
                    remain a slave.
                                                         —G.I. Gurdjieff




                  ehavioral methods in psychology are the outgrowth of early research

         B        into animal learning, emphasizing the roles of conditioning and rein-
                  forcement in the unlearning and learning of action tendencies. Mod-
          ern cognitive-behavioral approaches to change treat thinking as a kind
          of behavior, making use of such methods as imagery and self-statements
          to modify our reactions to situations. Like the cognitive restructuring
          framework from Chapter 6, behavioral methods make extensive use of
          homework assignments in fostering change. The focus is on here-and-now
          skills-building, not explorations of past conflicts and their repetition in
          present-day relationships. Behavioral methods have been especially pow-
          erful in addressing anxiety problems, as well as issues of anger and frus-
          tration. In this chapter, we’ll explore behavioral techniques that you can
          master as part of your own self-coaching. You’ll find these techniques par-
          ticularly relevant to help you deal with performance pressures and impul-
          sive behavior.
               Because the essence of the behavioral approach is skills-building, you
          will benefit from these methods to the degree that you are a diligent stu-
          dent. Frequent practice of the techniques and application of skills to new
          situations is crucial in making the behavioral efforts stick. Pay particular
          attention to the exposure methods discussed later in the chapter and also

                                                                                     195

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          196                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          summarized in Enhancing Trader Performance. Pound for pound, so to
          speak, I find these the most useful methods in the coaching arsenal. Let’s
          take a look at how you can master these methods for yourself . . .


          LESSON 61: UNDERSTAND
          YOUR CONTINGENCIES

          The essence of behavioral psychology is that we share many of the learn-
          ing mechanisms found in the animal world. My cats Gina and Ginger, for
          instance, have learned that, when I get up at 5 A.M., I will give them some
          moist food for their breakfast. As soon as they hear me walking about,
          they come from wherever they’ve been sleeping and hustle into the kitchen,
          looking up at me with expectation. Because of repetition, they have learned
          to associate my walking around after a period of quiet with being fed. This
          is the essence of stimulus-response learning: animals learn to associate
          response patterns to stimulus situations. The contingencies between sit-
          uation and response are reinforced over time, strengthening the learned
          pattern.

              Much of our behavior consists of simple responses to particular
              situations.

               In traditional behaviorism, it is not necessary to explain these learned
          connections with reference to the mental states of the learners. The cats
          don’t explicitly reason that it must be morning and I am rising for the day,
          so they should go to the kitchen. Nor does reason enter their decision to
          come to the portion of the house where we keep the moist food rather than
          the dry. Rather, the stimulus of hearing me awaken triggers their anticipa-
          tion, much as hearing a particular old song may trigger associated memo-
          ries. In the cognitive restructuring approach to coaching, we look to remap
          the mind and shift the explicit thinking of traders. In the behavioral mode,
          the goal is to unlearn associative connections that bring negative outcomes
          and acquire new connections that will be more adaptive.
               In behavioral psychology, unlearning is the flip side of learning: if we
          don’t reinforce a particular contingency over time, the associative links
          are weakened, and the response patterns eventually die out. If I were to
          ring a bell each evening and feed the cats but then not feed them in the
          morning, eventually they would stop coming to the kitchen in the morning.
          Instead, they would learn to come running at the sound of the bell. You
          build a behavior pattern by reinforcing it; you divest yourself of the pattern
          by removing reinforcement.
               Many negative behavior patterns in trading, from this perspec-
          tive, occur because they are either positively reinforced or negatively

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                197


          reinforced. This distinction is important and not well appreciated. Posi-
          tive reinforcement is like the feeding of the cats: people come to associate
          something favorable with a particular stimulus situation. Thus, for exam-
          ple, I may associate my early-morning market preparation with a particu-
          lar emotional state of readiness and mastery. That linkage has me looking
          forward to the preparation time and sticking with my routines. The contin-
          gencies between being prepared and feeling good (or being prepared and
          making good trades) are reinforced over time until they become ingrained
          habits.
               Negative reinforcement is a bit subtler, and it lies at the heart of why
          traders seem to cling to patterns that bring them losses. In negative re-
          inforcement, it is the removal of a negative set of consequences, not the
          appearance of something positive, that strengthens the bond between stim-
          ulus situation and response. Let’s say I am in a trade that is going against
          me and I bail out of the trade at the worst possible time, when everyone
          else is selling. Intellectually I may know that, on average, this is an inop-
          portune time to join the crowd, but the trade is so painful at that point that
          the exit feels, for the moment, like a relief. Drug addicts commonly begin
          their habits first by seeking a high (positive reinforcement), then by seek-
          ing to avoid withdrawal (negative reinforcement). The avoidance of pain
          is a powerful human reinforcement, and it shapes learned action patterns
          just as effectively as the introduction of pleasure.


              Many destructive trading behaviors are the result of pain-
              avoidance.


               One of the most devastating examples of learned behavior patterns in
          trading is the association of thrills and excitement with the assumption of
          risk. When traders take too much risk, they experience profits and losses
          that are very large relative to their portfolio size. Some traders may find
          these swings stimulating, to the point where they become their own re-
          inforcements. These traders find themselves trading, not for profits, but
          for thrills. Inevitably, the law of averages catches up to such traders. When
          these traders go through a series of losing trades, days, or weeks, their high
          leverage works against them and they blow up. This is not because thrill-
          seeking traders are inherently self-destructive. Rather, it is because they
          have learned, through repeated emotional experience, the linkage between
          risk-taking and excitement.
               Research suggests that contingencies between situations and re-
          sponses are more quickly and deeply learned if they are accompanied by
          strong emotion. This process is how people can become addicted to pow-
          erful drugs after only a few uses. It is also how we can become fearful and
          paralyzed by a single traumatic incident. An animal that would take weeks

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          198                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          to learn a new trick can learn to avoid tainted food after getting sick on it
          just once. Emotion accelerates behavioral learning. This is the source of
          many trading problems, and it also opens the door to powerful behavioral
          coaching methods.
               As your own trading coach, it is important that you understand your
          own contingencies: the linkages between your expectations and your be-
          haviors. Instead of thinking of your trading problems as irrational, think
          of them as learned patterns that are supported by something positive that
          you gain or something negative that you avoid. Something is reinforcing
          your worst trading behaviors: once you understand that contingency, you
          are well-positioned to remove the reinforcement and introduce new rein-
          forcers of desired trading patterns.


              Behavioral coaching is about reinforcing the right behaviors and
              removing reinforcement from the wrong ones.


              To get started, think back to your most recent episode of truly bad
          trading. I can recall, for instance, a recent incident in which I so convinced
          myself of a turnaround in a falling market that I held a position well beyond
          the original stop-loss point. What is the reinforcement in that situation? In
          my case, I had been on a nice winning streak and I didn’t want that to end.
          I associated getting out of the trade with breaking my streak; as long as I
          was in the trade, I could retain hope that my streak would be intact.
              That reasoning makes no sense of course and, if pursued to its logical
          conclusion, I could have given back every ounce of profit I made during the
          streak just by holding the one bad trade. But the emotional connection was
          strong: I was attached to the winning—so much so that its pull was greater
          than the pull of simply trading well.
              So take a look at your most recent episode of horrific trading. What
          gain were you associating with the bad trading? What negatives were you
          looking to avoid? What was the contingency at work? As previous lessons

                      COACHING CUE

          Identify the emotions that are most painful for you and then track their occur-
          rence during your trading. For some traders, this will be the pain of losing. Other
          traders respond negatively to boredom or to the helplessness of uncertainty.
          Many times your worst trading decisions will be the result of trying to rid your-
          self of those emotions. This negative reinforcement leads to hasty, unplanned
          trading behaviors that seem to make no sense in retrospect. If you can identify
          the negative reinforcement at work, you can more consciously and construc-
          tively deal with the diﬃcult feelings.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               199

          have emphasized, the first step in the change process is to become our own
          observers and recognize the patterns that hold us back. Your behaviors, as
          irrational and destructive as they seem, are there for a reason. A careful
          behavioral analysis will reveal the reasons—and will position you well for
          changing those.



          LESSON 62: IDENTIFY
          SUBTLE CONTINGENCIES

          The linkages between situations and our behavioral responses to those
          linkages are sometimes quite clear. When traders experience fear in a
          volatile market and prematurely exit a position, we can readily appreci-
          ate that they are managing their emotions, not their capital. The relief at
          being out of a fast market outweighs objective considerations of risk and
          reward.
               Other times, the contingencies that govern our behavior are far more
          subtle and difficult to identify. For that reason, such patterns can be ex-
          tremely challenging to change. If we don’t know what we’re responding to,
          it’s difficult to shape a different response pattern.
               Subtle shifts of mood are one example of stimulus situations that could
          affect decision-making without our awareness. For instance, some individ-
          uals are emotionally reactive to the amount of sunlight they receive and
          can experience winter blues or even seasonal affective problems during
          periods of low sunlight. This disruption can affect a trader’s concentration
          and motivation, interfering with his research and preparation. Similarly,
          family conflicts can affect mood, which in turn affects trading. One trader
          I worked with found himself less patient with his ideas, entering and exit-
          ing before his signals unfolded. When we looked into the problem, it was
          clearly episodic—not something that occurred every day. During periods
          of conflict at home, he was more irritated, and that manifested itself as
          impatience in his trading.


              The problem patterns in our trading are often triggered by subtle
              shifts in mood and energy level.


               Many physical cues can also affect mood and cognitive functioning.
          These cues include fatigue, hunger, muscle tension, and fitness. I know
          that I process market data much more effectively and efficiently when I am
          alert. Anything that affects my energy level adversely will also impair my
          ability to synthesize large amounts of market information. This is not only
          because I am less cognitively efficient, but because lack of alertness also

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          200                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          affects my mood. In a more fatigued state, I tend to feel less emotionally
          energetic and optimistic. I won’t look for that creative market idea; I’ll be-
          come more discouraged and risk-averse after losses. If I’m not clued into
          my physical state and its relationship to my mood, I’ll simply think that
          these periods of lesser performance are random. In fact, most mind and
          body shifts are as stimulus-response bound as any animal behavior in a
          learning experiment.
               As I emphasized in The Psychology of Trading, a great deal of our
          learning is state-based: what we know in one state of mind and body can
          be quite different from what we process in another state. When I am lis-
          tening to favorite music, my mind is expansive, I can see broad market
          relationships, and formulate big picture ideas to guide the week’s trade. In
          a state when I’m pressured for time or distracted by an irritating situation, I
          suffer from tunnel vision, losing the large perspective. On those occasions,
          I’m much more likely to make impulsive trades, responding to recent price
          action rather than broad market dynamics. Often those trades lack good
          risk/reward qualities; they are much more likely to be losers than winners.
               I refer to these subtle environmental cues as triggers, because they
          can set off behaviors that are unplanned and unwanted. When I’m irritated,
          for instance, I’ve learned to rid myself of the feeling by simply pushing
          aside whatever is bothering me. This reaction is a classic example of neg-
          ative reinforcement. If the thought of doing errands irritates me because
          I have other things I want to be doing, I quickly push the errands away
          and focus on what I want to do. The errands don’t get done, of course, and
          loom as a chronic irritant. My pattern of procrastination is clearly negative
          reinforcement–based, but it is not helpful: it leaves me with a lingering neg-
          ative mood and a backlog of unfinished business. Worse still, continually
          reinforced, the negative mood can become a pattern in my trading. It’s not
          too great a leap from procrastinating over errands to procrastinating about
          acting on a losing position.

              Many of the behavioral patterns that interfere with our day-to-day
              lives also find expression in our trading.


              Sometimes, when coaching yourself, you won’t know what is triggering
          your most troubling trading behaviors. They seem to come out of nowhere.
          That’s when it’s most important to use a trading journal to catalog all
          the possible factors—physical, situational, emotional, relationship-based,
          trading-based—that might be associated with your problematic trading.
          When you engage in this cataloging, you want as open a mind as possible;
          often, the patterns will be different from ones that you’ve been considering.
          One trader I worked with experienced trading problems for no apparent

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                  201

          reason; only after considerable review did we figure out that these prob-
          lems occurred when he experienced problems with the firm’s management.
          The frustration led him to seek gratification from his trading, impelling him
          to overtrade. He didn’t make a conscious connection between the two;
          rather, he was trading to manage an emotional state in a simple stimu-
          lus/response manner.
               The cataloging you undertake in your journal may need to cover a con-
          siderable period of time before you notice patterns. What you’re likely to
          find, however, is that how you trade is affected by your physical and emo-
          tional state—which is affected by situational factors at home and work. Un-
          derstanding these contingencies enables you to build some firewalls into
          your trading practice, as we will see in the next several lessons. Without
          such understanding, however, you’re likely to blindly repeat history, losing
          a measure of self-determination. It’s when we create our own contingen-
          cies that we truly possess free will and the ability to pursue our chosen
          goals.


                     COACHING CUE

          Track your daily physical well-being—your state of alertness, your energy level,
          your overall feeling of health—against your daily trading results. Many times
          fatigue, physical tension, and ill health contribute to lapses in concentration
          and a relapse into old, unhelpful behavior patterns. It is diﬃcult to make and
          sustain mental eﬀorts when you lack proper sleep or feel run down from a lack
          of exercise. Very often, our moods are inﬂuenced by our physical states, even
          by factors as subtle as what and how much we eat. When you keep a record of
          your daily performance as a function of your physical condition, you can see
          these relationships for yourself and begin preventive maintenance by keeping
          body—and thus mind—in peak operating condition.




          LESSON 63: HARNESS THE POWER
          OF SOCIAL LEARNING

          One of the greatest mistakes traders can make in coaching themselves is
          to work on their craft in isolation. It is easy to become isolated as a trader,
          particularly given that all it takes is a computer and Internet connection in
          one’s home to access the most liquid markets. During my work with trading
          firms, however, I have consistently seen how access to other professionals
          aids the learning process. From peer professionals you obtain role model-
          ing, encouragement, and valuable feedback on ideas. A social network of

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          202                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          traders also offers powerful behavioral advantages that can aid your self-
          coaching. Thanks to Web 2.0 and the many online resources available, such
          social networking can occur virtually, not just within a trading firm.
              Psychologist Albert Bandura was one of the first behaviorists to ob-
          serve how reinforcement in a social context can aid the acquisition of new
          behaviors. When we observe others rewarded for positive behaviors, the
          vicarious experience becomes part of our learning. Similarly, when we see
          others making mistakes and paying the price for these, we learn to avoid
          a similar fate. In this way, your learning becomes a model for others and
          theirs provides models for you. Experience is multiplied many times over,
          accelerating the learning process.


              Social learning multiplies experience and shortens learning
              curves.

               Since I first began full-time work as a coach for trading firms in 2004,
          my own trading has changed radically. I have learned to factor intermar-
          ket relationships into my trading, and I have learned to think in terms of
          risk-adjusted returns, with each trade carefully calibrated for both risk and
          reward. I am keenly aware of the effect of position sizing on my returns,
          and I carefully track my trading results to identify periods of shifting per-
          formance that might be attributable to market changes. These changes all
          resulted from observing successful professionals across a variety of trading
          settings, from proprietary trading shops to investment banks. Since insti-
          tuting these changes, I’ve enjoyed greater profitability with smaller draw-
          downs. Seeing how the best traders managed their capital provided me
          with powerful lessons that I could apply to my own trading.
               Perhaps my most effective learning, however, came from observing
          failed traders. I have seen many traders lose their jobs (and careers) as the
          result of faulty risk management and an inability to adapt to market shifts.
          Those failure experiences were painful for the traders, but also for me, as I
          developed close relationships with many of them. Their pain and the crush-
          ing of their dreams was powerful learning for me. I vowed to never make
          those mistakes myself.


              We learn most from emotional experience, including the experi-
              ences of others.

              When you share ideas in a social network, including self-coaching ef-
          forts, you obtain many learning experiences that become your own. Vicari-
          ous learning is still learning, whether it’s learning concrete trading skills or
          learning ways of handling performance pressures. One of the real values of

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                 203


          published interviews with successful traders, such as found in the Market
          Wizards series, is that you can learn from the experience of others. When
          you actually observe this experience in real time, however, the contingen-
          cies are much more immediate and powerful. How a trader in the hole pulls
          himself out, or how a trader adapts to a changing market, or how a trader
          successfully prepares for a market day—all provide models for your own
          behavior. You learn, not just from their actions, but also from observing
          the results of their actions.
               Once you enter a social network of capable and motivated peers, the
          praise and encouragement of the group become powerful reinforcers. Most
          of us want to be respected by our fellow professionals, and the support of
          valued peers can be a meaningful reward. This reinforcer occurs among
          children, who find that they are praised by teachers, parents, and peers for
          good behavior and not praised when they behave badly. Over time, this
          differential reinforcement creates associative links for the child, so that
          he will do the right things even if no immediate praise is available. Sim-
          ilarly, young, developing traders will absorb the praise of mentors like a
          sponge; this helps them associate the right trading behaviors with favor-
          able outcomes. When you share successes with fellow professionals, you
          turn social interaction into social learning.


              Find experienced traders who will not be shy in telling you when
              you are making mistakes. In their lessons, you will learn to teach
              yourself.


               For this lesson, I encourage you to locate online networks of traders
          (or assemble one of your own) in which there is openness about trading
          successes and failures. Online forums are a possible venue; you can also
          connect with readers of trading-oriented blogs who participate in discus-
          sions. Or perhaps you will choose to write your own blog, openly sharing
          your trading experiences and attracting like-minded peers. When you net-
          work with traders who have similar levels of motivation, commitment, and
          ability (as well as compatible trading styles and markets), you can estab-
          lish a framework in which learning follows from shared ideas and experi-
          ences. We’ve seen in Chapter 5 how relationships can be powerful agents of
          change. In the behavioral sense, you want to be part of the learning curves
          of other traders, so that you can absorb their lessons. A great start is to es-
          tablish such a mutual learning framework with just one other compatible
          trader. Their emotional learning experiences become yours; yours become
          theirs. Their victories spur your ability to do the right things; your accom-
          plishments show them the path to success. This effectively doubles your
          behavioral learning, supercharging your self-coaching efforts.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          204                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                     COACHING CUE

          An increasing number of professional trading ﬁrms—particularly proprietary
          trading shops—are creating online access to their traders, trading, and re-
          sources. Several of these ﬁrms are mentioned in Chapter 9. Read the blogs
          from these ﬁrms and participate in their learning activities as an excellent way
          to connect with other traders and model their best practices.




          LESSON 64: SHAPE YOUR TRADING
          BEHAVIORS

          Two children, two different homes: both improve their test grades in math;
          both fail in English. In the first home, the parents praise the improvement in
          math and encourage similar progress in English. In the second home, the
          parents call attention to the English grade and demand to know why the
          child couldn’t pick up that grade as well. Which child will be most likely to
          show further school progress?
              Behavioral psychologists who utilize behavior modification as a means
          for altering action patterns would support the first set of parents. Positive
          reinforcement, as a whole, works better than punishment. If we reinforce
          the right behaviors, the child will learn to do the right thing. If we punish
          the wrong behaviors, the child will learn to fear us. Nothing positive is
          necessarily learned.


              Punishment fails because it does not model and reinforce the right
              behaviors.


               Many traders seek to motivate themselves more through punishment
          than praise. These traders focus more on their losing trades than on their
          winners. They spend more time on weak areas of trading than building and
          extending their strengths. Such traders learn to associate unpleasant things
          with trading. These traders anticipate criticism and punishment and find it
          difficult to stay wholeheartedly engaged with the learning process.
               We can see such dynamics at work in the journals many traders keep.
          One page after another details what the trader did wrong and what he
          needs to do to improve. Self-evaluations emphasize the bad trading, every-
          thing that could have been better. It’s little wonder that these traders find
          it difficult to sustain the process of maintaining a journal. After all, who
          wants to face negativity and psychological punishment every working day?

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                    205



              Many traders fail to sustain work on their trading because they find
              little positive reinforcement in their work.

               Trainers use frequent rewards to teach animals tricks. The trainers
          don’t expect the dog to, say, jump through the hoops all at once. Rather,
          they will first give a reward each time the dog approaches the hoop. Then
          the trainer will wait for the dog to go through the hoop before they dole out
          the reward. Then they’ll lift the hoop just a couple of inches and reward the
          dog when it jumps through the hoop. Then they’ll add a second hoop and
          a third . . . they’ll raise the hoops a little at a time . . . all the while requir-
          ing new behaviors that are closer to the desired endpoint before giving the
          reward.
               This process is known as shaping. Trainers shape animal behaviors
          by rewarding successive approximations to desired ends. In a classroom,
          a teacher might first reward a disruptive student for five minutes of quiet
          attention. Later, it will take 10 minutes for the student to earn the reward;
          eventually the reward will require an entire class period of good behav-
          ior. Frequent-flyer programs at airlines aren’t so different. At first, you earn
          bonuses for simply joining the programs. Only after you ride the airline reg-
          ularly, however, do you earn later rewards. If you want the greatest perks,
          you have to shape your riding habits to fit the program.
               Shaping is a testament to the power of positive reinforcement. Imagine
          punishing the dog for not going through the hoops. The chances are good
          that the dog would simply cower in the presence of the trainer; it certainly
          wouldn’t figure out the right behaviors from the punishment of the wrong.
               When you are your own trading coach, you are the trainer as well
          as trainee. You are teaching yourself to jump through the hoops of good
          trading. For this reason, you need an approach to coaching that is grounded
          in positive reinforcement. Your coaching must stay relentlessly positive,
          building desired trading behaviors—not punishing the wrong ones.

              You can keep a positive tone to the learning process by shaping
              your trading behaviors: rewarding small, incremental progress to-
              ward the desired ends.

              The first place to implement the shaping approach is in a journal. As an
          experiment and a worthwhile exercise, try keeping a positive trading jour-
          nal for a few weeks. Divide your trading into several categories, such as:
            r Research and preparation.
            r Quality of trade ideas (ideas that carry conviction).

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 29, 2008   13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          206                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r Number of diversified (uncorrelated) trade ideas.
            r Quality of entries (favorable risk/reward for trades; low amount of heat
              taken per trade).
            r Sizing/management of trades (scaling in/out by planned criteria).
            r Execution of exits (following profit targets/stop losses).

               Each journal entry then focuses on what you did right in each of those
          categories each week. You write down, in specific detail, your best per-
          formance in each of these areas and then you review your entries before
          trading the next week, with the aim of continuing the positives.
               As the previous lesson noted, this use of positive reinforcement and
          shaping is even more powerful if you conduct your assessment in a so-
          cial framework, where you exchange your weekly positive report cards
          with one or more valued peers. This framework allows you to support the
          progress of others, even as they reward yours.
               One of the better pieces of self-coaching from early in my trading ca-
          reer occurred when I set a goal of reaching a certain size in my trading
          account. I normally don’t emphasize P/L goals, but in this case I wanted
          a tangible focus on steady profitability. Once I reached the goal, my com-
          mitment was to withdraw a portion of money from the trading account
          and use it for something enjoyable for the family. This emphasis rewarded
          my longer-term progress, but also brought my family into the positive rein-
          forcement. When I finish this book, one of my personal goals will be to lose
          some weight—long hours in airplanes and hotels between working with
          traders have taken their toll. I’ve promised myself a new wardrobe from a
          Chicago tailor if I reach my weight goals. Each week I’ll be weighing myself
          and tracking my progress. With every opportunity to snack, I’ll be thinking
          about that new wardrobe and how I would feel if I didn’t make weight that
          week. There’s little doubt in my mind that I’ll reach my goal.


              Tangible rewards for your success are among the strongest posi-
              tive reinforcers.

               The key to making a positive journal work is shaping. At first, you
          jot down entries for even very small things that you did right. Later, you
          only make notations of larger examples of virtuous trading. If you conduct
          the shaping process properly, you’ll always have good things to write
          about—even on losing days. This process ensures that you’re always learn-
          ing, always building on strengths, always keeping your motivation up. The
          difficult part about self-coaching isn’t just making progress, it’s sustaining
          the progress. Progress is much easier to accomplish when your focus is
          building yourself up, not tearing yourself down.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                    207


                      COACHING CUE

          What is meaningful for you as a tangible reward for your self-coaching progress?
          A vacation with loved ones? A new car? One trader I work with donates a portion
          of his proﬁts to a charity he deeply believes in; helping them out inspires his own
          eﬀorts. It helps to reinforce the small steps of progress via shaping, but it also
          helps to have a larger goal that you’re working toward; a goal that is meaningful
          for you. Remind yourself periodically of the goal; track your progress toward the
          goal. The psychologist Abraham Maslow recognized clearly: we perform at our
          best when we are impelled toward positive goals, not driven by deﬁcits and
          unmet needs.




          LESSON 65: THE CONDITIONING
          OF MARKETS

          A large part of money management follows from a deep appreciation of
          fat tails. Market returns are not normally distributed; they show a higher
          proportion of extreme occurrences than you would expect from a simple
          flipping of coins. This is true across all time frames. The odds of a multiple
          standard deviation move against you (or for you) are sufficiently high that,
          if you’re in the market frequently over a long period of time, you will surely
          encounter those periods in which markets stay irrational longer than you
          can stay solvent.
               The distribution of market returns is also leptokurtic: it is far more
          peaked around the median than a normal distribution. This implies that
          market moves revert to a mean more often than we would normally ex-
          pect by chance. Just as a market seems to be moving in one direction—
          trending—it reverses course and finishes little changed.
               It is difficult to imagine a situation better designed to create frustra-
          tion. Markets produce large moves more often than would be expected if
          returns were distributed normally, which leads traders to seek large, trend-
          ing moves. But markets also revert to mean returns more often than we
          would expect in normal distributions, creating many false trends. If you
          trade a countertrend strategy, you run the risk of being blown out by a
          multiple standard deviation move. If you try to jump aboard trends, you’ll
          find yourself chopped to pieces during false breakouts.


              The very structure of market returns ensures a high degree of psy-
              chological challenge for traders.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          208                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               The tendency of markets to make extreme moves amid frequent mean
          reversion creates interesting and important psychological challenges that
          affect self-coaching. To fully appreciate this, we need to understand the
          dynamics of behavioral conditioning.
               Let’s say that, each time I ring a bell, I hit you over the head. Soon,
          you’ll learn to duck as soon as you hear the bell. That is a conditioned re-
          sponse. Days later, you might be in a different location and will still duck if
          the bell sounds. It’s automatic; not a behavior guided by explicit reasoning.
          You’ve learned to associate bell and pain, just as Pavlov’s dogs associated
          a ringing bell with the appearance of meat. Bell rings, dogs salivate. Bell
          rings, you protect yourself.
               Now let’s take our experiment a step further. I ring a similar but dif-
          ferent bell and once again hit you over the head. Before long, you learn to
          duck whenever you hear any bell. This is called generalization. Your con-
          ditioned responses (the ducking) have now extended to a class of stimuli
          similar to the original one.
               Much of what we call traumatic stress is the result of such condition-
          ing. In the Psychology of Trading book, I mentioned my car accident in
          which I was thrown from a vehicle while riding as a passenger. Just as a
          result of that single, powerful event, I developed an anxiety response any-
          time I subsequently sat in the passenger seat of a car—even when the ve-
          hicle wasn’t moving! I had learned an associative connection between be-
          ing a passenger and extreme danger; the conditioning stuck with me even
          though I intellectually knew it made no sense.


              Many of our extreme reactions to market events are the result of
              prior conditioning.


               Powerful positive emotional events can yield the same kind of condi-
          tioning. The high obtained from certain drugs can be so strong that some
          people will develop addictive patterns after a single use. Underlying the
          addiction is the learned connection between the high and the use of the
          substance. That, too, overrides reason and reorganizes behavior.
               One of my greatest failures as a trading coach occurred with a young
          trader who experienced early market success. He took the time to observe
          markets, learn short-term patterns, and track his own trading. He started
          trading small and learned the important lessons about waiting for good en-
          try points, cutting losing trades, and letting his winning trades run to their
          target points. The trading firm was happy with his progress and gave him
          significantly greater size to trade. That was where I went wrong. I should
          have stepped in and demanded that the trader’s increase in risk be more
          graduated. Instead, armed with his new size, the young trader decided he
          would try to compete with the more experienced traders at the firm. He

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                209

          traded full size in his positions and his profits and losses swung wildly. Un-
          prepared emotionally for those swings, he became impulsive and, one day,
          abandoned all discipline, blowing himself up on a single trade he allowed
          to get away from him. He never recovered from that loss and eventually
          had to start over at another firm.


              It is impossible to remain emotionally stable if you greatly amplify
              your P/L swings.


               When traders are undercapitalized and still hope to trade for a living,
          they too are impelled to take high levels of risk to achieve their desired re-
          turns. The result is that their portfolio swings wildly, with gains and losses
          that represent a large portion of total account value. These financial swings
          bring emotional swings, both positive and negative. The larger the finan-
          cial swings, on average, the larger the emotional swings. The larger the
          emotional swings, the greater the potential for the development of learned,
          conditioned responses that disrupt future trading.
               When a trader undergoes an emotionally harrowing loss, many of
          the situational factors associated with that trade may become associ-
          ated with the emotional pain. Some of these situational factors, from the
          trader’s physical state to the particular type of movement in the market,
          may be quite random. Nonetheless, they can trigger the emotional pain,
          much like sitting in a passenger seat triggered my anxiety following the
          automobile accident. A trader who consulted me about problems pulling
          the trigger on good trade setups experienced precisely that problem. He
          had lost significant money shorting the market during an uptrend, incurring
          several large losses. Subsequently, even when his trades were small in size,
          he felt fear whenever he tried to short the market. The feelings associated
          with his loss came back as a conditioned response, inhibiting his trading.
          This is the dynamic behind the flashbacks that occur during post-traumatic
          stress: stimuli associated with the initial trauma trigger memories and feel-
          ings from that painful incident.
               The problem may have been just as severe had this trader made large
          money on the initial trade instead of losing. The emotional impact of a
          windfall profit, like the impact of a crack cocaine high, would bring its
          own conditioning, leading him to pursue similar gains (and highs) in future
          trades. It is poorly understood by traders that, psychologically, outsized
          gains are just as problematic as outsized losses. The fat tails of returns
          threaten fat tails of psychological response, interfering with sound percep-
          tion and decision-making.
               For this reason, when you’re your own trading coach, you don’t want
          patterns of extreme returns. Steady, consistent profits are far better for
          psychological performance than wild swings up and down, even though

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          210                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          they may lead to the same ultimate returns. Stated otherwise, good risk-
          adjusted returns are better for the psyche than extreme patterns of returns.
          It’s not how much you make, but how much you make per unit of risk
          taken that will keep you in or out of the performance zone.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to track the variability of your re-
          turns as intensively as your overall profitability. By variability of returns,
          I mean the absolute value of daily/weekly changes in your portfolio value:
          how much your account swings up or down on average each day. As mar-
          kets change in their volatility and as you shift in your level of conviction
          about trades, you’ll see changes in this variability. This tracking will tell
          you when you run more and less risk. On the whole, you’ll want greater
          variability when you trade well and have many solid ideas; you’ll want to
          cut your risk (lower the variability of returns) when you don’t see markets
          well and when good trading ideas and moves are scarce.

              Track the volatility of your returns, not just their direction. Volatil-
              ity affects trading psychology every bit as much as winning and
              losing.

               When you track the variability of returns, you’ll also be able to see
          when your swings in profit/loss are outliers from your historical norms.
          This will be an excellent alert that your levels of risk may be sufficient to
          generate those large emotional swings that will produce unwanted con-
          ditioned responses. Traders tend to love volatility when they’re making
          money and hate volatility when they’re losing. Psychologically, it makes
          sense to keep the volatility of your returns within bounds: markets may
          possess fat tails, but with prudent position sizing, your returns can remain
          stable. You don’t want markets conditioning your learning: you want to be
          your own coach, directing your own learning.


                      COACHING CUE

          The psychological research on trauma suggests that processing a very stressful
          event verbally—out loud or in writing—can be extremely helpful in making sense
          of that event and divesting it of enduring emotional impact. When we repeat
          something again and again, it becomes familiar to us and no longer evokes
          powerful emotion. If you encounter outsized gains or losses in your portfolio,
          double down in your use of the trading journal or in your conversations with
          peer traders to thoroughly process what happened and why. As noted above,
          this process is just as important following large gains as following large losses.
          When highly emotional events bypass explicit processing, that is when we are
          most vulnerable to the eﬀects of conditioning.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                211


          LESSON 66: THE POWER
          OF INCOMPATIBILITY

          Earlier we saw how much of what we learn is state-dependent. We as-
          sociate particular outcomes with specific physical and emotional states.
          These associative links trigger unwanted behavior patterns when we enter
          those states. The classical conditioning mentioned in the previous lesson is
          an excellent example: if we experience overwhelming anxiety due to large
          losses, exiting the market may provide immediate relief. Subsequent expe-
          riences of anxiety in the market may trigger the same exiting behavior even
          when it would be in our financial interest to hold the position. The associa-
          tion between the anxiety and perceptions of danger may be so strong that
          it overwhelms our prior planning.
               Boredom, for many active traders, can be as noxious as strong anxiety.
          It may be associated with failure to make money, or it may have much
          earlier negative associations: being lonely or feeling abandoned as a child.
          If you get into a trade—particularly a risky one—you immediately relieve
          the boredom, but you create a new trading problem. In such cases, the
          trading behaviors triggered by the state are more psychological in their
          origins than logical.


              If trading is associated with an aversive state, we tend to do what
              is necessary to alleviate the state, even at the expense of our port-
              folios.

               One of the simplest behavioral techniques for breaking these bonds of
          conditioning is to place yourself in a state that is incompatible with the one
          that triggers your problematic trading. Thus, for instance, if you find that
          anxiety triggers hasty and ill-timed market exits, you would work on plac-
          ing yourself in a calm, relaxed physical condition that is incompatible with
          anxiety. If boredom were your nemesis, you would cultivate activities that
          hold your interest during slow markets. When I am fatigued, I find that a
          round of vigorous exercise not only makes me more alert, but also triggers
          positive action patterns, as I tackle work that had previously seemed over-
          whelming. If you’re not in a state that supports sound decision-making,
          your self-coaching focus turns from the markets to yourself and doing
          something different to shift your state.
               Two of the methods I have found particularly helpful in maintaining
          states incompatible with one’s triggers are controlling breathing and mus-
          cle tension during trading. When I focus on the screen and breathe deeply
          and slowly while I follow the market, I minimize the physical manifesta-
          tions of any form of overexcitement—from overconfidence to fear—and
          stay in a highly focused mode that I have learned to associate with good

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          212                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          trading. When we slow ourselves down through deep, rhythmical breath-
          ing, it is difficult to be simultaneously speeded up and excited. The careful
          breathing thus acts as a dampener on extreme emotion. It reinforces self-
          control and discipline at the most elemental level.
               In my own trading, I’ve found that problematic trading tends to occur
          when I am physically tense, especially when I tense the muscles of my fore-
          head. I rarely knit my eyebrows and wrinkle my forehead when I am com-
          fortable in a situation. Conversely, I am prone to headaches and associate
          forehead muscle tension with tension headaches, which can pose a consid-
          erable distraction. By purposely keeping my forehead relaxed—widening
          my eyes slightly and going into a temporary stare—as I maintain the slow,
          deep breathing, I can sustain a state incompatible with the ones that oc-
          cur when I’m on edge. Instead of waiting to become tense or nervous and
          then performing exercises to reduce these feelings, I proactively pursue
          and maintain an incompatible state before problematic trading occurs.


              Control the arousal level of the body as a powerful means of con-
              trolling the arousal level of the mind.

               I can often recognize my physical level of tension by my seating po-
          sition. When I am comfortable, confident, and relaxed, I sit in the chair
          firmly, with my lower back and behind flush with the seat back. When mar-
          ket events trigger a stress response, however, I find myself leaning forward,
          with my seat near the end of the chair. Over time, this position gives me
          a backache in my lower back. I know that I’m not comfortable with my
          trading or with the markets when I feel that pain. Often, I’ll readjust my
          seating, reorient my breathing, and find it easier to view the markets from
          a different—and more promising—angle.
               The principle of incompatibility can also extend to thinking behaviors.
          Cognitive-behavioral work treats thinking as a discrete behavior that can
          be conditioned and modified just like any muscular behavior. If we tend to
          engage in negative thinking during trading, we can enter a mode of think-
          ing that is incompatible with negativity before trading problems occur. I
          frequently have one of my cats sitting beside me as I’m trading, usually
          Gina. It’s nearly impossible for me to become consumed with negative or
          angry thoughts when I am petting Gina. She alternates between licking me
          and rubbing her face against mine, all the while purring loudly and making
          kneading movements with her front paws. Stroking the cat helps me stay
          in touch with loving, caring feelings that are incompatible with the nastier
          emotions that can emerge during frustrating market periods.
               One of the states that is most disruptive to my trading is what I would
          call a chaotic state, in which I feel as though I’m a step behind markets,

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                213


          not really understanding what is going on. It’s a confused state, but also a
          frustrated one, as I don’t feel in control in the situation. I’ve learned that
          if I place myself in environments that are incompatible with chaos, I am
          in a much more balanced frame of mind. Such environments are ordered
          and well organized—my notes and materials are readily at hand—and they
          are designed to evoke positive feelings. Music is particularly effective for
          me in this regard. It is also harder for me to feel chaotic if I have gone
          through a routine of research and track markets prior to the New York
          stock market open. I organize my ideas in advance to help me feel more
          organized, settled, and in control.


              You can structure your trading routines to make them incompati-
              ble with stress and distress.


               When you are your own trading coach, you have wide latitude in modi-
          fying your environment—inner and outer—so that it does not trigger states
          that are associated with poor trading. One trader I worked with loved trad-
          ing in a room with other traders (he joined a prop firm) because, in the
          social setting, he was too embarrassed to engage in behaviors he might
          lapse into on his own. He found that he was much more prudent about
          risk-taking and much less emotionally volatile when he was accountable to
          others. The key is to find a state or situation that is incompatible with
          the triggers for your worst trading and then build that into your normal
          trading routine.
               A simple way to get started is to complete the following sentence:


              I trade my worst when I                                                 .


               Once you write your answer, your assignment is to create the incom-
          patible situation. For example, I would complete the sentence with “don’t
          do my homework.” I know that my day’s preparation for the trade has a
          huge bearing on my odds for success that day. I also know that I’m least
          likely to do my homework diligently if I oversleep or am fatigued. When
          I build stretching and physical exercise into my early mornings, I enter
          an energized state that prepares me for the homework: I’ve learned to as-
          sociate the vigorous, energetic state with being prepared and engaging in
          my preparation. After you observe the differences in your states when you
          trade your best and worst, you’ll be able to construct similar activities that
          proactively keep you in an optimal trading mode.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          214                                                     THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                      COACHING CUE

          I mentioned above how chaotic feelings are a trigger for my worst trading. If
          markets aren’t making sense to me, my mind feels scrambled and trading seems
          rushed. I’ve learned through hard experience that a powerful way to create a
          state incompatible with that chaos is to temporarily lower my trading size until
          I regain a feel for markets. With much less at risk, I don’t feel pressured and yet
          can stay actively engaged in markets. When we control our risk we can control
          our emotional reactions to markets: it’s tough to panic when you have little on
          the line. Markets seem to move slower—and our feel for them returns—when
          we’re not distracted by emotions triggered by risk and uncertainty.




          LESSON 67: BUILD ON POSITIVE
          ASSOCIATIONS

          In the cognitive-behavioral framework, we can utilize imagery as a stimulus
          to evoke desired responses, triggering our own positive, learned patterns.
          Making use of imagery in this fashion can help us create positive associa-
          tive links, triggering our best trading behaviors.
               Let’s say we have a trader who anticipates an early-morning entry into
          the market based upon a researched setup. Before the market opens, she
          visualizes the setup and her execution, noting the feelings of satisfaction
          from making a good decision. This positive mental rehearsal acts as a
          preparation for the actual trade, as she follows the behavioral pathway she
          has laid down in advance. I call this anticipatory reinforcement: by imag-
          ining the positive benefits of doing the right things, we strengthen positive
          associative links and make it easier to act on our learning in real time.
               Many traders conduct anticipatory reinforcement in reverse: they
          dwell on negative outcomes and feared scenarios, undercutting their own
          sense of efficacy. This, in essence, is anticipatory punishment, and it leads
          traders to miss opportunities or to not act on them. I’ve found over the
          years that much of what separates the excellent traders from the average
          ones is not so much their ideas, but what they do with those ideas. Two
          traders will have positions go their way and then pull back a bit. The first
          trader, anticipating punishment, fears losing his gain and takes a quick,
          small profit. The second trader, anticipating reward, adds to the position
          on the pull back and reaps large gains. Same idea, different outcomes, all
          as the result of conditioned patterns of thinking.

              Our ways of thinking can reflect conditioned responses; that’s how
              markets can control our minds.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                215

                When we reinforce positive patterns, we not only strengthen these but
          also begin the process of extinguishing negative patterns. In behavioral the-
          ory, a stimulus-response connection is extinguished over time if it is not re-
          inforced. The animal that was given food each time it performed a trick will
          eventually stop performing the trick if food is not forthcoming. Behavioral
          patterns, in this way, not only have to be learned but also actively rein-
          forced to find active expression in our trading. We can unlearn negative
          behavior patterns simply by withdrawing their reinforcement and by intro-
          ducing more powerful rewards elsewhere. This is a powerful principle.
                One common learned pattern among traders is the connection between
          anger/frustration and aggression. When traders become frustrated by mar-
          ket conditions—say, a choppy, directionless trade—they react out of anger
          and lash out by placing trades to get even with the offending market. This
          pattern—relieving anger by lashing out—may make traders feel better for
          the moment (negative reinforcement), but it leads to poor decisions and
          losing trades.
                How can we use positive associations to unlearn this pattern of re-
          venge trading?
                Suppose a trader engages in a thorough examination of his trading dur-
          ing the choppy markets of the past month. He investigates charts to iden-
          tify the choppy periods and then reviews all his trades from these periods,
          pulling out the most successful ones. What he may find is that his success-
          ful trades in choppy conditions are more selective (fewer in number); that
          they are placed near the edges of trading ranges; and that they are held for
          shorter periods of time to capitalize either on breakouts/false breakouts or
          on moves back within the range. His losing trades, on the other hand, tend
          to be placed in the middle of the range and are held for longer periods,
          reversing before they can hit distant price targets.
                Armed with this bit of self-coaching information, the trader now can
          view the choppy period as one of opportunity, not threat. When he notices
          a trading range going into the day’s trade, he can use imagery to rehearse
          calm caution when the market is trading near the center of the range.
          He can also mentally rehearse entries near range extremes, including his
          placement of modest price targets. When he rehearses these trade ideas,
          it is with the feelings associated with his prior winning trades. Over time,
          with repetition, he learns a positive association with range-bound, choppy
          markets. His prior behavior pattern, built on frustration and its removal,
          is no longer reinforced. It faces gradual extinction, as he builds the more
          constructive associative patterns.

              Find the market conditions that are most challenging for you and
              then identify how you trade them best. This process turns threat
              into opportunity.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          216                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                Since the late 1970s, I have traded actively and gained a pretty good feel
          for many short-term market patterns, including patterns of volume and in-
          traday sentiment. Many times I first become aware of these patterns with a
          gut feeling: something seems right or not right about the market action.
          I have learned through hard-won experience that I suffer in my perfor-
          mance if I ignore these intuitions. They are not based on hopes or fears;
          they are the result of implicit learning over a period of years. In my mental
          rehearsals, I include scenarios in which I act upon this feel for the market,
          recalling specific, recent trades in which I saved myself considerable grief
          by not overriding my judgment. This rehearsal of positive associations has
          created a kind of intrinsic reinforcement: I actively look forward to the
          emergence of those gut cues and am mentally prepared to act on them
          when they arise.
                As I mentioned in the previous section, I have many positive associ-
          ations to music. Indeed, as I’m writing this, I’m listening to music from a
          group called Edenbridge, a kind of music that I find both energetic and up-
          lifting. My writing today began at 6:30 A.M., and it is now two hours later
          and I’m going strong. The association of the music with the writing keeps
          me in a positive state of mind. It keeps me looking forward to the writing,
          even when the editing process can become tedious. With these positive
          connections activated regularly, my more negative patterns of procrastina-
          tion are not reinforced and gradually lose their strength. It is not necessary
          for me to fight my tendency to procrastinate; such internal conflict would
          likely create writer’s block. Rather, I create a positive source of motivation
          that outweighs the negative reinforcement value of avoidance.
                A good example of the power of anticipatory reinforcement is occur-
          ring right now as I am writing this. I’m on a 15-hour flight to Hong Kong on
          my way to working with traders in Asia. The cabin is dark, and I’m feeling
          tired. I’ve promised myself, however, that I can take a long-awaited rest af-
          ter I finish this chapter. I find myself more motivated as I get closer to my
          goal; by the time I get to rest, I will have earned it. Ultimately, the positive
          reinforcement of living up to my deal and earning the rest outweighs any
          negative reinforcement value of avoiding the writing out of tiredness.


              Find your strongest motivations and link those to your best behav-
              iors.

               Your coaching assignment for this lesson is to create what-if scenarios
          for the day’s trading, rehearsing the good, planned trades you would make
          in each scenario. These rehearsals should be detailed and vivid, accompa-
          nied by a visualization of the pride and satisfaction you experience when
          you trade well. For every single what-if outcome, you should envision a

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                   217

          concrete response that embodies good trading. In this way, you plan your
          trading as well as your trades, but you also strengthen the bonds of positive
          learned patterns and extinguish the negative patterns. As your own trading
          coach, you have the power to be teacher as well as student: the shaper of
          behavior as well as the one whose behavior is shaped. If you take the active
          learning role that lies at the heart of the behavioral approach, you become
          the programmer of your own patterns.

                      COACHING CUE

          I ﬁnd it helpful to help traders identify the highlights of their trading from the
          past week: what they did especially well. From these highlights, we frame ideas
          about what the trader is really good at—what makes her successful. We then use
          this what I’m good at idea to frame positive goals for the coming week: how
          the trader is going to enact those strengths in the next few days. Because these
          are goals we track together, we create a situation of anticipatory reinforcement
          and a momentum for continuing best practices. This is a process you can carry
          forward with trading colleagues: share what you do best and how you put your
          best talents and skills into practice. Focus on your best trading and you begin
          the process of extinguishing your worst practices.



          LESSON 68: EXPOSURE: A POWERFUL
          AND FLEXIBLE BEHAVIORAL METHOD

          If I had to name a single behavioral method that is of greatest value to
          traders, it would be exposure. As I described in my chapter on behavioral
          methods in the Enhancing Trader Performance book, exposure is a tech-
          nique that enables you to reprogram those stimulus-response triggers that
          set off faulty trading.
               A major idea underlying exposure is that the avoidance of negative
          experience itself becomes a reinforcer, preventing people from overcom-
          ing learned fears. Let’s say, for instance, that I have taken large losses
          on a short position and now experience fear whenever a buy program
          hits the tape and moves the index higher by several ticks. I can avoid
          that fear by simply exiting the position. While that avoidance is a relief, it
          never addresses the learned connection impelling my behavior. Indeed, it
          reinforces my fear by acting on it. It is impossible to overcome a fear when
          you give into it.

              We overcome fear by facing it successfully.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          218                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              In exposure work, we intentionally expose ourselves to the situations
          that set us off. Generally, this process begins with imaginal exposure (fac-
          ing situations in realistic imagery) and progresses to in vivo (real time)
          exposure. These exposures pair the trigger situation with learned skills
          that invoke a state incompatible with the bad trading. Thus, in the exam-
          ple above, we might rehearse a calm, focused state of mind while vividly
          imagining the market moving higher against us.
              Think about what this accomplishes. On one hand, we immerse our-
          selves in thoughts and images of something we find threatening. We force
          ourselves to experience our worst fears. At the same time, however, we
          make special efforts to keep ourselves calm and controlled. We talk to our-
          selves in calming ways, slow our breathing, and keep our bodies relaxed.
          We do this again and again, repeating the imagined scenarios until we are
          able to stay completely calm and focused throughout. In that way, we ex-
          tinguish the learned connection between the situation and the fear.

              Exposure methods are ways to reprogram our emotional re-
              sponses to situations.

              Two steps are important to make exposure effective:

           1. Before you try to expose yourself to imagery of your trigger situations,
              make sure you’ve thoroughly learned the coping skill that you’ll be us-
              ing as part of the pairing. For example, you want to practice a deep
              breathing, muscle relaxation routine every day for at least a week to
              ensure that you can focus and relax yourself on demand. At first, prac-
              ticing the technique may take 20 minutes or so to get quite relaxed;
              later it will take only 15, then 10. Eventually, with enough practice,
              you’ll be able to relax and focus yourself quite effectively with just a
              few deep breaths. You want to get to that point before undertaking the
              imagery work. The idea is to internalize the coping skill before you try
              to pair it with threatening situations.
           2. Repetition is the key to effective exposure work. You don’t just imagine
              a stressful situation, keep yourself calm, and then go on with your day.
              Rather, you imagine the situation in great detail, with multiple vari-
              ations. You won’t imagine very stressful situations until you’ve been
              able to keep yourself thoroughly relaxed with less stressful imagined
              scenarios. If that means you repeat a single scenario five times until it
              no longer elicits anxiety, that is fine. The goal is to unlearn the connec-
              tion between the situation and the unwanted response and train your-
              self to a new connection: between the trigger situation and staying in
              the zone.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               219

              As a beginning exercise, here is a very basic exposure routine that you
          can apply to almost any trading patterns that you wish to change. I have
          found that this works very well for reprogramming anxiety responses to
          market situations and frustration/anger responses. Any time a situation
          evokes an exaggerated emotional and/or behavioral response from you,
          exposure methods can be used to alter your reactions:

              Step 1. Seat yourself comfortably, listening to relaxing music through
                 headphones. While listening, close your eyes and breathe deeply
                 and slowly. Keep yourself still physically and keep your mind fo-
                 cused on the music.
              Step 2. Start with lower part of your body and gradually tense and
                 relax the muscles, performing several repetitions with each muscle
                 group before moving higher along your body. Thus you tense and
                 relax your toes several times, then your flex your foot, then your
                 lower leg, etc. All the while you are tensing and relaxing, you are
                 breathing deeply and slowly and staying focused on the music.
              Step 3. Once you reach the top of your body, tensing and relaxing the
                 muscles of your face, you then take a few more deep breaths and
                 notice your body’s relaxation.
              Step 4. With the music still playing, imagine in detail a trading situ-
                 ation that you anticipate. Visualize the position you’re in and the
                 market movement. Imagine the market behaving in a way that nor-
                 mally would trigger your fear, frustration, etc. All the while, you
                 are breathing deeply and slowly, keeping your muscles relaxed,
                 and playing the music in the background.
              Step 5. When you feel yourself tense up or experience fear or frustra-
                 tion, stop the visualization (freeze the frame) and simply go back
                 to breathing deeply and slowly and listening to the music. Once
                 you’re relaxed again, continue the scenario from where you left
                 off. Make sure you freeze things and keep yourself calm and fo-
                 cused when trigger responses start to affect your visualization.
              Step 6. If you had to interrupt the visualization to keep yourself calm,
                 repeat the exact same scenario the same way until you can get all
                 the way through without having to freeze the scene. At that point,
                 you’ve extinguished the response to the situation.
              Step 7. After you master one scenario, construct variations of the
                 scenario, perhaps making each one a bit more stressful. Once
                 again, don’t move on to another scene until you’ve been able to
                 keep yourself fully relaxed and focused during the scene you’ve
                 been rehearsing. If you can stay calm and focused during a

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:12     Printer: Yet to come




          220                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



                   visualization of a moderate stress, make the next visualizations
                   more threatening. Don’t stop your exposure work until you have
                   tackled your absolute worst fears.

               This basic exercise enables you to extinguish emotional and behavioral
          responses to trading situations that can lose you money. If you rehearse
          staying calm and focused in stressful situations, you build a new learned
          connection and reprogram your behavioral responses. This process is ef-
          fective for situations in which you’ve been through extreme losses, and it
          is also quite useful in reprogramming patterns of overtrading. When you
          coach yourself to face and overcome your worst fears, you build confi-
          dence, resilience, and a sense of efficacy, empowering yourself in situa-
          tions where you had seemed powerless.


                      COACHING CUE

          Imagery can be powerful in programming new responses, but consider extend-
          ing your exposure work to live trading. Such in-vivo exposure, beginning with
          small trading size and gradually ramping up to full size with success, is the sin-
          gle most eﬀective technique for reprogramming traumatic experiences in trad-
          ing, such as large losses that overwhelm mood and conﬁdence. By re-creating
          the market conditions that caused the trauma in imagery—and then facing those
          conditions in simulated and actual trading—all the while rehearsing self-control
          skills, we can regain a sense of mastery over trading. It takes repeated experi-
          ences of safety during exposure work to undo traumatic stresses. Eventually,
          the emotional learning that we can face our fears without terrible things hap-
          pening sinks in and contributes to a newfound conﬁdence.




          LESSON 69: EXTEND EXPOSURE
          WORK TO BUILD SKILLS

          In the previous lesson, we saw how exposure methods can be used to de-
          program negative behavior patterns. Just a small adjustment in the tech-
          nique is needed to create positive learning by rehearsing and reinforcing
          proper trading behaviors.
               The fundamental difficulty of trading is that we know what to do
          (enter on pullbacks in a trend, size positions appropriately) when we are
          out of the heat of battle. When stressed, however, or when we face un-
          usual opportunity, we find that other behavior patterns are triggered and it
          is much more difficult to do the right things. I work with a good number of
          experienced portfolio managers and proprietary traders, and even they
          make the occasional rookie errors, in which they are swayed by situational

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               221

          influences. Techniques that reinforce the right actions can be useful for the
          pros as well as beginners.
               One trader I worked with was bedeviled with the problem of regret. He
          would enter a longer-term position and, while it was going his way, he was
          fine. As soon as the position retraced some of the gains, however, he began
          to regret that he hadn’t lightened up at the more favorable price levels.
          This regret was a very tangible psychological influence for him. At times, it
          became outright guilt as he convinced himself that he had done the wrong
          thing.
               What happened as a result of this pattern is that he would inevitably
          assuage this guilt by waiting for the profits on the trade to move back to
          their high water mark so that he had an exit approximating the one he
          had missed. The problem was that this cut his original trade idea short.
          Many times he would take his profit on the first rebound from the retrace-
          ment, only to see the position move toward his initial target without him
          on board. Then the trader experienced massive regret and guilt. This led
          him to seek additional home run trades (to relieve his newest guilt), only
          to make the same mistakes on these trades as well. By the time I met with
          this trader, all he could talk about was how much he could have made if he
          had just traded the way he planned.


              Many traders are shaken out of good trades when they aim to not
              lose, rather than aim to maximize profits.

               The exposure work for this trader was straightforward. As the previ-
          ous lesson outlined, we first just worked on the skill of staying calm and
          focused. I used the heart-rate variability (HRV) biofeedback unit for this
          work (www.heartmath.com). He had to concentrate and breathe rhythmi-
          cally and deeply while keeping his HRV readings high. The trader was able
          to use the biofeedback unit for practice at home and he could track his
          skill-building by keeping the majority of his readings in the highest bin for
          a continuous period of five minutes or more. He found that he could keep
          his readings high by focusing his attention (counting in his head), keeping
          physically still and relaxed, and breathing from his diaphragm in a smooth,
          gradual fashion.
               Once he had mastered the skill of keeping himself in the HRV zone,
          he used visualization to walk himself through his trade setup, including his
          profit target and stop. He vividly imagined the market moving in his favor,
          but instead of imagining himself being pleased with this outcome (which
          was what happened in his usual trading), he mentally reviewed his original
          trade plan and told himself that nothing had changed to alter the plan: it
          was working as anticipated. I asked the trader to simply repeat this part
          of the visualization over and over until he no longer reacted to the initial

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          222                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          gain with excitement (and with a mental accounting of his paper profits).
          Instead, he visualized staying calm by reaffirming his plan for the trade.

              Getting excited by gains in a trade is the first step toward getting
              panicky when those gains are threatened.

               Only after the trader had mastered this aspect of the trading situation
          did we proceed to imagining that the market retraced some of its initial
          move, eroding a portion of his gain. Again and again, he imagined this re-
          tracement while breathing deeply and slowly and staying focused on the
          computer screen (which displayed his biofeedback readings), until the im-
          agery of the retracement no longer brought fear or concern. At that point
          we mentally rehearsed the pullbacks all over again, this time while not only
          staying calm and focused but also while mentally reviewing his trade idea
          and his exits. Our trader spontaneously began to focus his attention on how
          proud he would feel if he just stuck with his ideas and saw them through.
          This pride, for him, was the opposite of the guilt he had been feeling. When
          he invoked this sense of pride, he not only extinguished his old behavior,
          but also positively reinforced his discipline.
               The key to making this work is mentally rehearsing the right trading
          behaviors while you’re in the state that normally triggers the wrong ones.
          When you’re your own trading coach, your challenge isn’t simply to figure
          out the right things to do. Rather, your job is to be able to act in the right
          ways in situations that normally pull for all the wrong trading behaviors.
          If you practice good trading when you’re not in realistic trading situations,
          it is much less powerful than overcoming learned connections as they’re
          occurring.
               Of course, we can extend the power of exposure by shifting from
          imagery-based work to actual trading. Typically I’ll have a trader start trad-
          ing small size at first while engaging in the deep breathing and concentra-
          tion and implementing trading plans. While the trade is on, the trader keeps
          her biofeedback readings in the optimal range and rehearses the plan for
          that trade. During the troublesome retracements, the trader simply repeats
          what she had practiced in the imagery: staying focused on the trading plan
          and keeping physically calm through the regular, deep breathing. Once this
          process is successful with small trades, the trader can gradually increase
          size back to the normal level of risk, performing the biofeedback work at
          each new size level.

              Utilize biofeedback during trading and you can often detect
              departures from the performance zone before you are consciously
              aware of them.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger        December 29, 2008    13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                                  223


              If there are challenging market situations, the best approach to master
          them is to face them directly while you stay grounded in your best trad-
          ing practices. With the use of imagery, this conditioning work can be ac-
          complished outside of market hours and without taking risks. With repeti-
          tion, the mentally rehearsed patterns feel increasingly natural, as the old,
          learned connections fall away. It is not always comfortable doing exposure
          work—and the better you do it, the less comfortable it will be—but you
          cannot coach yourself through discomfort unless you’re willing and able to
          tackle it directly. Rehearse your best trading practices while you’re in your
          most stressful situations; it is one of the most effective training techniques
          you can employ.

                        COACHING CUE

          It is helpful to formulate your best trading practices as speciﬁc, concrete rules
          so that these rules can be rehearsed in detail during the exposure work. Among
          the rules I’ve found most helpful for this work are:
            r Generating trading ideas by identifying themes that cut across sectors
              and/or asset classes.
            r Waiting for pullbacks in a trend before entering a position.
            r Establishing my target price at the outset of the trade, so that I can enter
              the trade with a proﬁt potential that exceeds the loss I’m willing to take.
            r Sizing my trade so that I’m risking a ﬁxed, small percentage of my portfolio
              value on the idea.
            r Adding to longer-term trades on pullbacks after they have gone my way
              and remain proﬁtable.
            r Exiting trades on my planned stop-loss points or at my designated proﬁt
              target.

               Trading rules will diﬀer for each trader depending on their markets and
          trading style. The important thing is to know what you do when you are most
          successful, so that you can cement these positive patterns, even as you expose
          yourself to challenging trading conditions.




          LESSON 70: A BEHAVIORAL
          FRAMEWORK FOR DEALING
          WITH WORRY

          We hear a great deal about fear and greed, and all of us have experienced
          bouts of overconfidence and frustration. On a day-in and day-out basis,
          however, few problems are as thorny for traders as worry.

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          224                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Worry occurs when we anticipate an adverse outcome and its conse-
          quences. We can worry about missing an opportunity or about being wrong
          in a trade. We can worry about the future of our trading career or, some-
          times, worries from personal life outside of trading can affect decision-
          making. It is common, for instance, for young traders to experience more
          stress after they have married, had children, or purchased a new home.
          With the added financial responsibilities come worries.
               Worry is problematic for traders for several reasons:
            r It undercuts confidence. It is difficult to maintain optimism and fo-
              cus on progress while anticipating negative outcomes.
            r It interferes with concentration. Thought and emotion directed to-
              ward worries are taken away from tracking market patterns.
            r It leads to impulsive decisions. For most people, worry is so nox-
              ious that they will take action to reduce their concerns. Such action is
              not necessarily in the best interest of one’s trading account.
            r It is not productive. Rarely does worry lead to concrete, constructive
              problem solving. Worrying about negative outcomes does not generally
              help people achieve positive ones.
               It is difficult to make sense of worry from a behavioral vantage point.
          No one truly enjoys worry, so it is unclear why the behavior persists. This
          is especially puzzling for chronic worriers. They do not enjoy focusing on
          negative things and typically are not happy people. So what keeps them
          worrying?

              Visualizing worst-case scenarios and how you would handle them
              is constructive; worry reinforces a sense of hopelessness and help-
              lessness in the face of those scenarios.

              To make sense of worry, let’s review the difference between thinking
          about a negative event and actually experiencing that event. I can think
          about losing money in my trading and the thought does not bring partic-
          ular anxiety or concern. If, however, I vividly imagine a particular trade
          that I am planning and visualize myself taking a loss on a large position, I
          can generate palpable experiences of nervousness. Abstract thought rarely
          generates strong emotion. Imagery, on the other hand, acts as a surrogate
          for reality. Think about sexuality and nothing happens; imagine an eroti-
          cally charged scene and the body responds.
              From a behavioral vantage point, worry is a form of thinking and, as
          such, it can function as a negative reinforcer. Let’s say that I anticipate a
          stressful meeting with the risk manager at my trading firm. My underlying
          fear is that he will reduce my capital and express a loss of confidence in

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          Learning New Action Patterns                                               225

          me. Rather than experience the hurt and resentment that such a meeting
          would engender, I worry about making the meeting on time, what I’ll say
          in the meeting, what I might miss in the markets while the meeting is go-
          ing on, etc. None of these worries has the power to evoke strong emotion.
          Rather, the worries serve as distractions from the difficult feelings I would
          experience if I actually visualized outcomes of the meeting. If I avoid ex-
          periencing these feelings, worry serves as a negative reinforcer. Strange as
          it might seem, worry is not so noxious when the alternative is facing scary
          outcomes.
               Worry can possess reinforcement value in other ways, as well. If I were
          feeling out of control in my trading, that feeling would be unpleasant to
          dwell upon. If I worry about details in the work I’m going to have done
          on my house, I shift my focus to something more controllable. While it
          may seem that I worry about negative outcomes—and, in the example, I
          am—the psychological reality is that I substitute a lesser concern for a
          greater one when I worry. What we worry about is usually not what is
          scariest to us. Indeed, it is a diversion from the scariest scenario—and
          therein lies its reinforcement value.


              Worries about small things usually mask larger concerns.


               Exposure work can be a great antidote to worry. When we expose our-
          selves to our greatest concerns—our worst-case scenarios—we can plan
          for these possibilities and mentally rehearse positive coping. If, for in-
          stance, I’m threatened by an upcoming meeting with the risk manager at
          my firm, I’ll look at the worst case outcome—a large cut in my capital—and
          figure out a trading plan that will focus on my most successful trading
          and bring me back to my prior portfolio size. Once I anticipate the worst
          and figure out how I’d deal with it, I take the catastrophe out of the situa-
          tion. That eliminates the need for worry-based diversions. Worry thinking
          can’t be a negative reinforcer if it is more noxious than the alternative of
          facing possible outcomes constructively.
               A great way to coach yourself past worry is to make note whenever
          you catch yourself worrying and ask, “What am I really fearful of? What’s
          the real issue here?” What you generally find is that there’s an unresolved
          situation looming in the background. Until the situation is faced squarely,
          it intrudes in your work and affects your mood. Suppose you find yourself
          worrying about whether a specific trade will work out. When you stop and
          reflect, you realize that you’ve sized the trade and placed your stop-loss
          point in such a way as to make such worry unnecessary. So what is the
          real concern? Perhaps the fear is of one’s future as a trader. Perhaps it’s a
          conflict at home. Whatever the real problem is, you want to visualize the

P1: JYS
c07     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:12    Printer: Yet to come




          226                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          situation vividly and walk yourself through your most constructive re-
          sponse. Then visualize the situation and solution again—and again. With
          repetition, the worst-case scenario will become routine. It will no longer
          evoke strong emotion. And that will leave you with little reason for worry.


                     COACHING CUE

          Worry can be a great signal that we are harboring larger concerns about our
          basic trade ideas. When I ﬁnd myself glued to the screen, following the market
          tick by tick during a longer-term trade, I know that something is wrong. Be-
          neath the worries about the market’s moment-to-moment action, I have deeper
          concerns—perhaps that my basic idea is wrong all along. This can be a useful
          signal: when we’re comfortable with trades, we don’t need to worry over every
          tick in the market. And when we are worrying about those ticks, it’s a good sign
          that we’re not comfortable with our position—and that can lead to constructive
          reevaluation and planning.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          7: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-seven-links.html
               Chapter 9 of Enhancing Trader Performance details several strategies
          for changing behaviors that interfere with trading decisions, including a
          step-by-step description of exposure-based methods. See also Chapter 8 of
          that book for cognitive and cognitive-behavioral techniques.
               A detailed account of behavioral approaches to change can be found
          in the chapter “Brief Behavior Therapy” by Hembree, Roth, Bux, and
          Foa in The Art and Science of Brief Psychotherapies, edited by Dewan,
          Steenbarger, and Greenberg (American Psychiatric Publishing, 2004).
               Articles relevant to behavioral views of trading can be found among
          my collected articles, including the articles on “Behavioral Patterns That
          Sabotage Traders” and “Techniques for Overcoming Performance Anxiety
          in Trading”: www.brettsteenbarger.com/articles.htm
               Articles on emotional intelligence, staying in the zone, and balancing
          trading with the rest of life can be found in Psychology of Trading, edited
          by Laura Sether (W&A Publishing, 2007).

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 8




                       Coaching Your
                      Trading Business


                    He is not great who is not greatly good.
                                                  —William Shakespeare




              n the previous chapters, we have explored ways of coaching yourself

         I    by becoming your own trading psychologist. Now we will turn to an-
              other facet of self-coaching: guiding your trading business. You, as a
          trader, are a business person no less than someone who offers goods and
          services to the public. You have overhead to cover, and you have returns
          you need to make to stay in business. Like any business owner, you risk
          your time, effort, and capital to earn returns higher than you could obtain
          from other activities. But are you getting the best return for your efforts?
          Are you taking the right amount of risk at the right times? Are you devot-
          ing the majority of your efforts to the activities that will provide the best
          returns? When you are your own business coach, you focus both on do-
          ing the right things and upon doing things right. There’s much you can do
          as your own psychologist. Now let’s see how you can thrive as your own
          business consultant . . .



          LESSON 71: THE IMPORTANCE
          OF STARTUP CAPITAL

          If you consistently break even in your trading, you will eventually lose
          all your capital. This is because there are costs embedded within trading,
          such as commissions and fees for data services, software, and computer

                                                                                    227

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          228                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          support. It is no different in any business: an entrepreneur has to at least
          make enough to cover the overhead to stay afloat.
               Many businesses fail because they lack adequate startup capital and
          cannot keep their overhead under tight control. They don’t realize how
          long it will take to build a large and loyal customer base. As a result, they
          burn through their cash before they can sustain breakeven operations. To
          preserve capital, they cut back on essentials such as marketing and adver-
          tising. This creates a death spiral of fewer customers, lower income, and
          further belt-tightening.
               Adequate startup capital enables the entrepreneur to make a begin-
          ner’s mistakes and address the holes in his business plan before going out
          of business. Business plans are like battle plans in times of war: they are
          indispensable, but also subject to frequent change. Without sufficient re-
          sources, businesses cannot weather those changes.


              Much of the stress that new traders experience is the result of an
              inadequate capital base: they are trying to do too much with too
              little.


               So it is with traders. When they begin their business with modest cap-
          ital, they cannot survive their learning curves when markets change and
          inevitable slumps take hold. Like failing businesses, they then begin to cut
          back on essential overhead, such as needed data and redundant systems.
          With little more to trade with than the same charts that everyone else looks
          at, the undercapitalized trader in overhead reduction mode virtually en-
          sures that she will never maintain a distinctive edge.
               So how much startup capital is sufficient for a trader? If you are just
          learning about markets, very little capital is needed to advance your learn-
          ing curve. I began trading in late 1977 with a $2,500 stock market account
          at a regional brokerage in Kansas City. That enabled me to trade 100-share
          lots of individual stocks and test out my ideas without undue risk. Now,
          with the advent of simulation platforms, as discussed in the Enhancing
          Trader Performance book, it is possible to realistically test strategies and
          gain a feel for markets without placing money at risk.
               Some commentators downplay the value of paper trading and
          simulation-based trading with live data because the psychological pres-
          sures of losing real money (and the overconfidence that comes with win-
          ning) are not present. This, however, is precisely why simulated trading
          is perfect for traders early in their development. Simulation enables the
          beginner to simply focus on the mechanics of trading and the recognition
          of trading patterns without having to worry about losing startup capital.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              229


          After all, if traders can’t succeed in simulated trading, there’s no way they’ll
          succeed when those psychological pressures are added to the mix!
               What makes sense, therefore, is to require yourself to earn consistent
          money in practice trading before you assume modest risk with 100 shares
          (or one lot of a futures contract). You thus need to sustain success with
          that small size before you trade larger. Just as a business should sustain
          success with one store before opening other outlets, a trader should have
          to earn his way toward trading size. If beginning traders stick to this one
          self-coaching rule, many could stay in the game long enough to become
          experienced traders.



              A great business rule: Make yourself earn increases in trading
              size/risk by trading well and consistently with smaller size/risk.



               When the aim is trading for a living, far more startup capital is required.
          At the money management firms I currently work with, for example, a port-
          folio manager is quite a star if she can sustain 30 percent returns year after
          year without taking undue risk. That portfolio manager will inevitably be
          given more capital to manage and, if success follows, may even strike out
          on her own with her own fund. In truth, a consistent 15 percent annual
          return, achieved with modest risk, will keep a portfolio manager well em-
          ployed at most firms. True, any particular trader may achieve outsized re-
          turns in a given year, especially if taking large risk. The question, however,
          is: What kinds of average returns are sustainable over time?
               A developing trader who expects to outperform seasoned money man-
          agers year after year substitutes fantasies for business plans. But if con-
          sistent 30 percent returns after expenses are stellar, how much trading
          capital would be required to sustain a living—and to keep the trading ac-
          count growing at the same time? It’s not difficult to see that an account well
          into the six figures would be a minimum startup for a trader that wanted a
          good living from his work.
               Not many traders early in their careers have access to that kind of liq-
          uid capital. As a result, they start with much less capital and try to trade
          it aggressively to generate returns large enough to support a household.
          For a while, that might work out. Eventually, however, such traders sus-
          tain grievous losses that cannot be surmounted. After all, once you lose
          50 percent of your capital, you have to double your remaining money just to
          get back to where you were. An undercapitalized trader, like an undercap-
          italized business, can’t weather many adverse events—especially if taking
          large and frequent risks.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          230                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              Long before you seek to trade for a living, you should work at trad-
              ing competence: just breaking even after costs.

              When you are your own trading coach, you’re also the manager and
          entrepreneur of your own trading business. That means that you have to
          start with a viable plan for success. Among other things, that plan should
          address:

           1. How you’ll learn markets and obtain trading competencies.
           2. How you’ll capitalize your business so that you can make a good in-
              come from realistic, solid risk-adjusted returns.

               If you cannot raise the capital needed to make a living from realisti-
          cally good returns, then your challenge is to make yourself attractive to
          trading firms that can front you sufficient trading capital. Take the steps
          needed to become attractive to such a firm and make that part of your
          business plan; this will form the basis for the next lesson. For now, your
          assignment is simply to learn markets before you put significant capital at
          risk, establish success over a range of market conditions and cycles, and
          ensure adequate access to capital before you give up your day job. Stress
          test the startup plan for your trading business: calculate how you would
          get by if returns were modest for the first couple of years. Run your plan by
          seasoned traders who make their living from markets; find the weak spots
          and address them. As the old saying goes, failing to plan is tantamount to
          planning to fail.

                     COACHING CUE

          One of the smartest business decisions I made in my trading was to begin with
          an account small enough that it would not impact my family’s lifestyle if I lost
          every penny. Early in my development, I had no illusions of trading for a living;
          my goal was to simply get better. A major milestone in my development came
          when I could consistently keep losing trades smaller than winners. Early in my
          trading eﬀorts, it was a few large losers that impaired my overall performance.
          Had I been trading with money needed for my family’s well-being, the stress of
          making rookie mistakes would have been overwhelming. Margie referred to my
          trading account as play money; she never counted on it or the income from it
          in our ﬁnancial planning. Without the pressure of proﬁtability demands early in
          my development, I was free to make mistakes and learn from them. A sure way
          to maximize stress and lower your odds of success is to put your capital at risk
          before you have cultivated your skills.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               231


          LESSON 72: PLAN YOUR
          TRADING BUSINESS

          When you’re your own trading coach, you are also the manager of your
          trading business. What is your business plan for success? How are you go-
          ing to achieve your goals as a trader?
               The first step toward good planning is to know why you are trading.
          That sounds silly: doesn’t everyone trade to make money? Yes and no; I’m
          continually surprised at traders’ fuzziness about their goals. If you’re a be-
          ginner, your goal is simply to learn the ropes, internalize market patterns,
          and practice skills related to good execution and risk management. If so, as
          the previous lesson emphasized, you can accomplish those ends with little
          or no capital at risk. What you need is a learning plan and a platform from
          which you can observe markets and trade them in simulation mode. (The
          elements of learning plans are covered in Enhancing Trader Performance
          and will be addressed in later lessons in this chapter).
               If you are like me and don’t trade full time for a living, your goal is dif-
          ferent. Your objective is to make more than the riskless rate of return (i.e.,
          the amount you could earn, say, from a savings bond or bank certificate of
          deposit) after expenses. In that case, you allocate a portion of your savings
          to your trading account and use that portion of your money to improve
          returns from other investments and savings vehicles. This process means
          that you will be particularly sensitive to risk-adjusted returns, as you won’t
          want to place your savings at undue risk. Trading, in that context, is part
          of diversification of your capital and is part of a larger financial plan.


              Your business plan will look different if you’re trading as an avo-
              cation rather than as your vocation.


              If you’re trading for a living, then you’re truly in the mode in which
          your trading is your business. A retail business needs to know how it will
          make money: what products they will sell, how they will sell them, how
          much it will cost them to sell them, and how much they can charge for
          them in order to make an acceptable return on investment. In your trading
          business, the questions become:

            r What will you trade and how will you trade it? What simulated and live
              trading experience tells you that this will be successful?
            r What will your overhead be? This includes software, hardware, com-
              missions, and other expenses related to full-time trading, from the cost
              of data to your electronic connections and educational materials.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          232                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH


            r How much can you expect to make per trade? Per month? Per year?
              What is the likely variability of your income? Will this be manageable?

              These questions require hard data based on experience, not guesses or
          hopes.
              Before you attempt to trade for a living, you should have a sufficient
          base of experience to tell you four things:
            r What is the average size of my winning trade?
            r What is the average ratio of my winning trades to losing trades?
            r What is my average percentage of winning versus losing trades?
            r What is my average variability (volatility) of returns per day, week, and
              month?

              The answers to these questions will determine the likely path of your
          returns: the income generated from your trading business. These questions
          lead you to ask other questions:
            r What kind of trader am I: do I tend to make money by being right more
              often than wrong, by having larger winning trades than losers, or a
              combination of the two?
            r How much variation in my winning percentage and in the ratio of the
              size of winners versus losers is normal for me?
            r How large would my trading need to be to generate acceptable returns
              and how much capital would I need to support that trading without
              undergoing drastic swings?

               It is surprising—and dismaying—how few traders really look under
          the hood of their trading to understand how they make money. Because
          traders don’t have a grasp on how they perform on average and how much
          variation from average can be expected, they are poorly equipped to dis-
          tinguish normal drawdowns from troublesome slumps. They are also in a
          poor position to identify those occasions when the patterns of their returns
          shift due to changing markets.

              If your trading experience does not extend to a variety of market
              cycles and conditions, your trading business will be ill prepared to
              weather shifts in volatility and trend.

              Your assignment for this lesson is to go to Henry Carstens’ Vertical
          Solutions site (www.verticalsolutions.com/tools.html) and check out his
          two forecaster tools, using your own trading data as inputs. His first
          tool will show you how the path of your returns will vary as a function
          of changes in volatility. These volatility shifts could be attributable to

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              233


          market changes or to your taking more risk in each of your trades. You’ll
          see clearly how much drawdown is associated with a given level of volatil-
          ity, which will help you gauge your own tolerance.
               The second forecaster tool asks you to input the average size of your
          winning trade, your average ratio of winning to losing trades, and the ratio
          of the size of your average winners to losers. Run the forecaster many times
          with your data and you’ll see a variety of plausible sets of returns. This will
          give you a good sense for the expectable runs (to the upside and downside)
          in your trading, as well as the expectable returns over a 100-trade sequence.
               Finally, tweak the parameters from the second forecaster to simulate
          the paths of possible returns if your average winning trade shrinks (maybe
          due to slow markets) or if your ratio of winning to losing trades declines
          (perhaps because of misreading markets). Tweak the ratio of the size of
          your average winners and losers to see what happens to your returns if
          you lose discipline and hold losers too long or cut losers short, creating
          poor risk/reward per trade.
               All of these what-if scenarios will give you a good sense for what you
          can expect from your trading. It is much easier to deal with business ad-
          versity if you’ve planned for it in advance. When you’re coaching yourself,
          the more you know about your trading business, the better you’ll be able
          to make it grow.


                     COACHING CUE

          An important element of success in building a trading career is being able to
          identify periods of underperformance as quickly as possible, before they create
          large drawdowns. The more you know about your trading—the average sizes
          and durations of drawdowns and the variability around those averages—the
          better prepared you’ll be to identify departures from those norms. Keep statis-
          tics on your trading so you can also highlight periods in which you’re trading
          particularly well and learn from these episodes. The single most important step
          you can take to further your trading performance is to keep detailed metrics
          on your trading. These steps will highlight what you’re doing right and wrong,
          informing your self-coaching eﬀorts.




          LESSON 73: DIVERSIFY YOUR
          TRADING BUSINESS

          Suppose you have a passion for coffee and decide to start your own coffee-
          house as a business. You develop reliable sources for high quality beans,

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          234                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          purchase a roaster, and rent space in a well-trafficked area. You furnish
          the café attractively and purchase all the cups, saucers, and utensils you
          will need. Altogether you sink $100,000 into your new enterprise, which
          is loaned from a bank with your home as collateral. Your average cost to
          serve a cup of coffee, just based on materials and labor expenses alone,
          is 50 cents. At $1.50 per cup, you’re making a dollar for each cup you sell.
          At 300 customers per day, that’s $300 per day or about $90,000 per year.
          That doesn’t leave you with much to take as a salary once you pay off your
          overhead.
               In this scenario, you can only make a go of the business by increas-
          ing the number of customers coming to the café, by increasing the average
          expenditure per customer, or both. So let’s say you try to increase the aver-
          age check size per customer by adding something additional to the menu.
          In addition to coffee, you now also serve tea.
               Unfortunately, this doesn’t help your business greatly. A few more cus-
          tomers enter the café who are tea drinkers, but few customers order both
          coffee and tea. As a result, you’ve increased your overhead (for tea equip-
          ment and supplies), but haven’t greatly added to the bottom line. Tea over-
          laps coffee too much to add much to the menu; it doesn’t really diversify
          the offerings of your café.
               Suppose, however, you add pastries to the menu, sourcing them from
          a local bakery. Now you find that many people interested in your coffee
          also like a pastry to go with their drinks; this increases the size of their
          checks and enables you to make profits from two sources instead of one:
          the beverage and the pastry. You also now attract people who are inter-
          ested in a snack or who just want a bite to eat after a concert or theater.
          The increased traffic also adds to the bottom line.
               What has happened is that you’ve made your business more diversi-
          fied. You have multiple profit centers, not just one. If you offered evening
          entertainment, sandwiches, and breakfast items, you would be even more
          diversified. Instead of attracting 300 patrons per day at one dollar each,
          you might attract 800 a day at $2.50 each. With $2,000 a day of gross in-
          come after labor and materials costs, you now have the basis for a thriving
          business. Moreover, should a café open elsewhere in the neighborhood,
          your business will be protected because of its other unique offerings.


              Diversification leverages talent.


               The same business principles that impact the viability of the café ap-
          ply to trading. When you trade different markets, time frames, and patterns,
          you generate multiple potential profit sources. This protects you when mar-
          kets shift and place any single idea or pattern into drawdown mode. It also

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              235

          leverages your trading productivity, as you now can generate profits from
          many centers instead of a very few.
               There are many ways of diversifying your trading business. If you are
          an intraday trader, you’ll be diversified by trading long and short and by
          allocating your trades to different stock names and/or sectors. You may
          also hold some positions overnight, creating a degree of diversification by
          time frame as well. If you are trading over a longer time frame, you may
          trade different markets or strategies, each with different holding periods.
               The key, for the trader as well as the café, is to make sure that diversi-
          fication truly adds diversity. Adding tea to a coffee menu did not achieve
          adequate diversification for the café. Adding a Dow trade to an S&P 500
          trade similarly fails to add unique value. Your diversification should pro-
          vide a truly independent and reliable income stream. When the coffee busi-
          ness is slow, for example, customers may come to the café for a bite to
          eat. This keeps the flow of customers strong through the day. Similarly,
          when one of your trading strategies is drawing down, other ones that are
          not correlated can sustain the flow of profits to your account.
               Of course, when you diversify, you need to make sure you stay within
          your range of expertise. Adding fresh entrées to a menu would make lit-
          tle sense for a café owner who lacked cooking skills. Similarly, it doesn’t
          help your profitability as a trader to add strategies that are not well tested
          and known to be successful. Diversification only makes sense when it adds
          unique value to what you’re already doing.
               Many beginning traders think they’ll find a way of trading that is prof-
          itable and then trade that for a career. Rarely are markets so accommo-
          dating. If a café brings in a huge number of customers, you can be sure
          competitors will soon follow. If a trading strategy is successful, it will find
          wide interest. Successful businesses must always innovate, staying ahead
          of the competitive curve. Adding new sources of revenue to exploit chang-
          ing markets is essential to long-term survival.
               I cannot emphasize this strongly enough: markets change. Edges in
          markets disappear. Trends change. The participants in markets change.
          The themes that drive markets change. The levels of volatility and risk
          in markets change. I have heard many promoters hype trading methods
          that they claim are successful in all markets, but I have yet to see docu-
          mentation of such success. Every trader I have known who has sustained a
          long, successful career has evolved over time, just as successful businesses
          evolve with changing consumer tastes and economic conditions. Quite a
          few traders I’ve known who have been successful with a single method
          have failed to sustain that success when that strategy no longer fit market
          conditions (momentum trading of tech stocks in the late 1990s) or when it
          became so overcrowded that the edge disappeared (scalping ticks on the
          S&P 500 index by reading and gaming order flow). It’s difficult to learn how
          to trade; even harder to unlearn old ways and cultivate new ones.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          236                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              The successful trading business, like elite technology, pharma-
              ceutical, consumer, and manufacturing firms, devote significant
              resources to research and development: staying ahead of their
              markets.

               When you are your own trading coach, it’s not enough to learn mar-
          kets. You’re an entrepreneur; you’re always developing new strategies, new
          ways of building upon your strengths. What products do you have in your
          pipeline? What markets, strategies, or time frames are you looking to ex-
          pand to? You can adapt your current trading approaches to new markets or
          cultivate new strategies for familiar markets. Your challenge is to develop
          a pipeline: to always be innovating, always searching for new sources of
          profit that capitalize on what you do best.
               Many traders sit down at their stations a little before markets open,
          trade through the day, and then go home, repeating the process day after
          day. That schedule is like coming to work at your café, putting in your
          hours, and then going home until the next workday. That is what you do if
          you’re the employee of the business, not the owner. Your challenge, as your
          own coach, is to actively own and manage your trading business, not just
          put in hours in front of a screen. You need an edge to succeed at trading, but
          you need to develop fresh sources of edge to sustain your trading business.

                     COACHING CUE

          I ﬁnd there is value in learning trading skills at time frames diﬀerent from your
          own. Short-term, intraday traders can beneﬁt from looking at larger market
          themes that move the markets day to day, including intermarket relationships
          and correlations among stock sectors. If you identify those themes and relation-
          ships you can catch market trends as they emerge. Conversely, I ﬁnd it helpful
          for longer-term traders, portfolio managers, and investors to learn the mar-
          ket timing perspectives of the short-term trader. This process aids execution,
          helping traders enter—and add to positions—at good prices. The views from
          diﬀerent time frames can fertilize the search for new sources of edge: the per-
          spectives of big-picture macro investors and laser-focused market makers can
          add value to one another.



          LESSON 74: TRACK YOUR
          TRADING RESULTS

          You cannot coach your trading to success if you do not keep score. Keeping
          score is more than tracking your profits and losses for the day, week, or

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              237


          year. It means knowing how you’re performing and how this compares with
          your normal performance.
               Score keeping makes sense if you once again think of your trading
          as a business. A sophisticated retail clothing firm tracks sales closely ev-
          ery week. Retailers know not only how much they’ve sold in total, but
          how much of each product. Perhaps the economy is slow, so women’s
          accessories—which are lower-priced—are hot, but high-priced clothing is
          not. The company that tracks these trends regularly will be in the best
          position to shift their product mix and maximize profits. Similarly, if one
          store is dramatically underperforming its peers despite a favorable loca-
          tion, managers can use that information to see what might be going wrong
          at the store and make corrections.
               Score keeping in the business world can be extremely detailed. There
          are good reasons for the investments in information systems that we ob-
          serve among the world’s most successful corporations. Firms may track
          sales by hour of the day to help them determine when to open and close.
          Purchasing patterns based on gender and age are factored into advertising
          messages and promotional campaigns. Score keeping provides the busi-
          ness with knowledge; in the business world, knowledge utilized properly is
          power.


              You can’t properly manage your business if you don’t understand
              what it is doing right and wrong.


               Nowhere do we see this power more dramatically than in quality con-
          trol. Firms such as Toyota collect reams of data on their manufacturing
          processes to help them identify lapses in quality, but also to make contin-
          uous improvements in manufacturing processes. If you don’t collect the
          data, you can’t establish the benchmarks that enable you to track progress.
          It’s not just about ensuring that you do well; the best businesses are
          driven to do better.
               When you keep score in your trading business, a few metrics are abso-
          lutely essential. These include:

            r Your equity curve, tracking changes in portfolio value over time.
            r Your number of winning versus losing trades.
            r The average size of your winning trades and the average size of your
              losers.
            r Your average win/loss per trade.
            r The variability of your daily returns.

              Let’s take a look at each metric in a bit of detail.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          238                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          Equity Curve
          Here you’re interested in the slope of your returns and changes in the slope.
          As we saw with Henry Carstens’ tools that simulate trading returns, a great
          deal of directional change in your portfolio can be attributed to chance.
          For that reason, you don’t want to overreact to every squiggle in your eq-
          uity curve, abandoning hard-won experience. Too many traders jump from
          one promised Holy Grail to another, shifting whenever they draw down.
          A far more promising framework for your self-coaching is to know the
          equity curve variation that is typical of your past trading, so that you
          can compare yourself against your own norms. If you have learned trad-
          ing properly, you will have a historical curve of your returns from simula-
          tion trading and small-size trading before you begin trading as an income-
          generating business. When your current equity curve varies meaningfully
          from your historical performance, that’s when you know you may need
          to make adjustments. If the variation is in a positive, profitable direction,
          you’ll want to isolate what is working for you so that you can take full ad-
          vantage. If the variation is creating outsized losses, you may need to cut
          your risk (reduce the size of your trades) and diagnose the problems.

              Knowing your normal performance is invaluable in identifying
              those periods when returns are significantly subnormal.


          Winning Versus Losing Trades
          This is a basic metric of how well you’re reading markets. Again, the em-
          phasis is not on hitting a particular number, but on comparing your cur-
          rent performance to your historical norms. Let’s say, for instance, you’re
          a trend follower. You tend to make money on only 40 percent of your
          trades, but you ride those winners for relatively large gains compared to
          your losers. If your win percentage suddenly drops to 25 percent, you’ll
          want to diagnose possible problems. Has your market turned choppy and
          directionless? Have you altered the way in which you’re entering trades or
          managing them? The more the drop to 25 percent is atypical of your histor-
          ical trading, the more you’ll want to enter a diagnostic mode. If, however,
          you’ve had past periods of 25 percent winners just as a function of slow,
          directionless markets, you may choose to ride things out without making
          major changes in your trading simply by focusing on markets or times of
          day with greater opportunity.

          Average Sizes of Winning and Losing Trades
          It doesn’t help to have 60 percent winning trades if the average size of your
          losers is twice that of your winners. Keeping score of the average sizes of

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                             239

          winners and losers will tell you a great deal about your execution of trade
          ideas—whether you’re entering at points that provide you with favorable
          returns relative to the heat that you’re taking. The data will also tell you
          how well you’re sticking to your risk management discipline, particularly
          stop-losses. If your average win size and loss size are expanding or con-
          tracting at the same time, you may simply be dealing with greater or lesser
          market volatility (or you may be sizing your positions larger or smaller). It
          is the relative shifts in size of average wins and losses that are most impor-
          tant for managing your business. If your winners are increasing in average
          size and your losers are decreasing, you’re obviously trading quite well. It
          will be important to identify what you’re doing right so that you can be con-
          sistent with it. Conversely, when losers are increasing in average size and
          winners are not, you want to figure out where the problem lies. Are you
          reading markets wrong, executing and managing trades poorly, or both?

          Average Win/Loss Per Trade
          Suppose you make a particular amount of money in January and the same
          amount in February. You might be tempted to conclude that you traded
          equally well in the two months. That would be a mistake, however. If you
          had placed 50 trades in the first month and 100 in the second month, then
          you can see that more trading did not produce more profit. Your average
          profit per trade actually declined. This suggests that at least some of your
          trading is not providing good returns, and that bears investigation. The sit-
          uation is similar to that of a business that opens five new stores in a year,
          but reports the same sales volume year over year. The average sales per
          store have actually declined, an important factor masked by the increase
          in overall activity. Average win/loss per trade will vary with your position
          sizing and with overall market volatility. Be alert for occasions in which
          market volatility may increase, but your average win per trade goes down:
          you may not be trading as well in shifting market conditions. Many times,
          traders make as much or more money if they simply focus on their best
          ideas and reduce their total number of trades. This selectivity shows up as
          a soaring average win per trade. It’s a great measure of the efficiency of
          your trading efforts.

              When you trade more often, make sure that the incremental trades
              are adding economic value.


          Variability of Daily Returns
          If you take your wins and losses for each day and convert those to abso-
          lute values, you’ll then have a distribution of your returns. You’ll see how
          much your equity curve moves per day on average. You’ll also observe the

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          240                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          variation around this average: the range of daily swings that is typical for
          your trading. The variation in your daily returns will ultimately shape the
          size of drawdowns you experience in your portfolio. Given that you’re go-
          ing to experience runs of losing days over your career, you’ll have larger
          drawdowns when those runs are 2 percent each than if they’re 1/2 percent.
          Indeed, if you investigate the losing periods that are historically typical
          of your trading, you can use these to calibrate the daily variability you
          want to tolerate in your trading. This is central to risk management. If you
          want to keep total drawdowns in your portfolio to less than 10 percent, for
          example, you cannot risk average daily swings of 2 percent. Of course, if
          you’re keeping drawdowns to less than 10 percent, you also cannot expect
          to be making 50 percent or more per year: risk and reward will be pro-
          portional. By calibrating the average swing in your portfolio per day, you
          target both overall risk and reward. If you’re trading very well (i.e., very
          profitably) with a relatively low variation in your portfolio size from day to
          day, you can probably afford to gradually pick up your risk (increase trade
          size to generate larger returns). If you’re trading poorly and losing money
          beyond your norms, you may want to reduce your daily variation and cut
          your risk.
              What all of this means is that, when you’re your own trading coach, you
          are also your own scorekeeper. The metrics above are, in my estimation,
          an essential part of the journals of any serious trader. The more you know
          about how you’re doing, the more prepared you’ll be to expand on your
          strengths and address your vulnerabilities.


                      COACHING CUE

          See David Adler’s lesson in Chapter 9 for additional perspectives on trader met-
          rics. A particular focus that is helpful is to examine what happens to your trades
          after your entry and what happens to them following your exit. Knowing the av-
          erage heat that you take on winning trades helps you gauge your execution skill;
          knowing the average move in your favor following your exit enables you to track
          the value of your exit criteria. Sometimes the most important data don’t show
          up on a P/L summary: how much money you left on the table by not patiently
          waiting for a good entry price or by exiting a move precipitously.




          LESSON 75: ADVANCED SCOREKEEPING
          FOR YOUR TRADING BUSINESS

          After the last lesson, you may be feeling overwhelmed by the data you
          need to keep to truly track and understand your trading business. I’m

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              241

          sorry to inform you that such items as equity curve, average numbers of
          winning/losing trades, and average size of winning/losing trades are just
          a start to serious scorekeeping. Professional traders at many firms obtain
          much more information than that about their performance. Access to ded-
          icated risk-management resources is one of the great advantages of work-
          ing in such firms. Although it is unlikely that you could duplicate the output
          of a dedicated risk manager, it is possible to drill down further into your
          trading to uncover patterns that will aid your self-coaching.
               In this lesson, we’ll focus on one specific advanced application of met-
          rics that can greatly enhance your efforts at performance improvement:
          tracking results across your markets and/or types of trades. This tracking
          will tell you, not only how well you’re doing, but also which trading is most
          contributing to and limiting your results.

              Of the different types of trades that you place, which most con-
              tribute to your profits? These are the drivers of your trading busi-
              ness success.

               We’ve already seen how important it is for your trading to be diversi-
          fied. Among the forms of diversification commonly found are:
            r Trading different instruments, such as individual stocks versus index
              ETFs.
            r Trading different markets, such as crude oil futures and stock indexes.
            r Trading different setups, such as event trades and breakout trades.
            r Trading different times of day and/or different time frames.

                To truly understand your trading business, you want to tag each of your
          trades by the type of trade it represents. You will thus segregate trades
          based on the criteria above. All your overnight trades, for instance, will
          go in one bin; all your day trades in another. All our stock index trades will
          fall into one category; all our fixed income trades in another. If you’re a day
          trader, you may want to segregate trades by time of day, by sector traded,
          or even by stock name.
                Each of these categories is a product in your trading business. Each
          category is a potential profit center. When you think of your trading as
          a diversified business, you want to know how each of your products is
          contributing to your bottom line. Simply looking at your bottom line will
          mask important differences in results among your trades.
                In practice this means that the metrics discussed in the last section—
          equity curve; proportion of winning/losing trades; average size of win-
          ning/losing trades; win/loss per trade; and variability of returns—should be
          broken down for each portion of your trading business. My own trading,

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          242                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          for example, consists of three kinds of trades: intraday trades with planned
          holding times of less than an hour; intraday swing trades with planned hold-
          ing times of greater than an hour; and overnight trades. The short intraday
          trades are based on short-term patterns of price, volume, and sentiment.
          The swing trades are trend following and are based on historical research
          that gauges the odds of taking out price levels derived from the prior day’s
          pivot points. The overnight trades are also trend following and are based on
          longer-term historical research that shows a directional edge to markets.
          These trades comprise different kinds of trades, because they are based on
          different rationales and involve different positioning in the markets. For
          instance, I can take a short-term intraday trade to the long side, but short
          the market for an overnight trade that same day.


              You can identify the inventory of your trading business by seg-
              regating trades based on what you’re trading and how you’re
              trading it.


              For other traders, the division of the trading business will be by asset
          class (rates trading versus currency trades versus equity trades) or by trad-
          ing strategy/setup (trades based on news items; trades based on opening
          gaps; trades based on relative sector strength). Relatively early in my trad-
          ing career, I broke my trades down by time of day and found very different
          metrics associated with morning, midday, and afternoon trades. That find-
          ing was instrumental in focusing my trading on the morning hours. In other
          words, the divisions of your trades should reflect anticipated differences
          in your income streams. If the returns from the trading strategies or ap-
          proaches are likely to be independent of one another, they will deserve
          their own bin for analysis by metrics.
              One of the breakdowns I’ve found most helpful in my trading is based
          on tagging the market conditions at the time of entry. To accomplish this,
          you would tag each trade based on whether it was placed in an upward
          trending market, a downward trending market, or a nontrending market.
          You will want to be consistent in how you identify market conditions; my
          own breakdowns (because I trade short-term) were simply based on how
          the current market session was trading relative to the previous one. It is
          common that traders will perform better in some market environments
          than others. For instance, based on a different breakdown, I learned that
          I was most profitable in moderate volatility markets, as tagged by the VIX
          index at the time of entry. When markets were relatively nonvolatile or
          highly volatile, my returns were significantly reduced. This was useful to
          me in knowing when and where to take risk.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               243



              Your trading business is most likely to succeed if you play to your
              strengths and work around your weaknesses.

               What you’ll find by breaking your trading down in this fashion is ar-
          eas of relative strength and weakness in your performance. You will have a
          historical database of the normal trading in each area of your trading busi-
          ness, and you will have a way to see how your current trading compares
          with those norms. Thus, for example, you might make money overall, but
          your event-based trades (those based on fast entries after news items and
          economic reports) perform much better than your trend-following trades.
          This may say something about the market you’re in and how you want to
          be trading that market by focusing more on what’s working than what is
          not. Similarly, you may find that your average numbers of winners versus
          losers is fine overall, but lagging in one particular market. This could lead
          you to fine tune what you’re doing in that market.
               The goal of keeping score is to identify your own patterns and use
          those patterns to your advantage.
               When you are coaching yourself, I encourage you to think of your-
          self as a collection of different trading systems. Each system—each mar-
          ket or strategy that you trade—contributes to the overall performance of
          your portfolio. Your job is to track the results of each system, see when
          each is performing well, and determine when each is underperforming.
          Armed with that information, you can thus allocate your capital most
          effectively to the systems that are working rather than those that are not.
          Diversification can’t work for you if you are not diversified in how you view
          and work on your trading performance. Just as a football coach breaks
          down his team’s performance into segments—running, kicking, defense
          against the run, defense against the pass, throwing—and works on each,
          you want to analyze and refine your team of strategies. Many a drawdown
          can be avoided if you stay on top of each segment of your trading business.

                      COACHING CUE

          When you add to positions or scale out of them, how much value does your
          management of the trade provide? What is the performance speciﬁc to the pieces
          that you add to positions? How much money do you save or leave on the table by
          removing pieces from your positions? If you hedge your positions, how much do
          you gain or save through those strategies? Are you better trading from the long
          or short side? Do you perform better when trades are entered at certain times
          of day or held for particular time frames? If you drill down with metrics you can
          become speciﬁc when you work on various facets of your trading performance.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          244                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 76: TRACK THE
          CORRELATIONS OF YOUR RETURNS

          A department store is an example of a diversified business. The store sells
          a variety of goods, so it attracts a wide range of customers. If consumers
          aren’t buying seasonal items, they may come in to shop for clothes or
          housewares. The departments that offer products for children, teens, men,
          and women ensure that there will be a mix among customers, evening out
          peaks and valleys in traffic patterns for any of these individual groups.
               In your trading business, diversification provides you with multiple
          profit centers. You can make money from intraday stock index trades and
          longer-term moves in the bond market, for example. If you divide your capi-
          tal among different ideas and strategies, you smooth out your equity curve,
          much as the presence of many departments keeps traffic flowing to the
          department store. When any one or two strategies fail to produce good re-
          turns, others contribute to the bottom line.


              Diversification in your trading enables you to stay afloat when
              any one of your strategies stops working for a while or becomes
              obsolete.

              But how do you know your trading business is truly diversified? Just
          because you are trading different setups or markets doesn’t mean that
          you necessarily possess a diversified portfolio. The only way you can en-
          sure true diversification is by tracking the correlations among the returns
          of your different strategies.
              Suppose you are a day trader who trades two basic patterns: moves
          on earnings news and breakouts from trading ranges. The idea is that your
          returns would be diversified because you would be long some names (earn-
          ings surprises and breakouts to the upside) and short others (earnings
          surprises and breakouts to the downside). You would also be diversified
          across market sectors and perhaps even by the time frame of your hold-
          ings. If you follow the logic of the previous lesson, you can track perfor-
          mance metrics for your earnings-related trades and your breakout trades.
          You can also track performance across your long trades and your shorts.
              When you track the correlation of your returns, you take the analysis a
          step further. You calculate the daily P/L for each of your strategies over a
          period of time. You then evaluate the correlation between the two number
          series. If the strategies are truly independent, they should not be highly cor-
          related. A slow market, for example, may yield little in the way of breakout
          trades, but you could still make money on selected stocks with earnings
          surprises. Similarly, you may get little earnings news on a particular day,

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              245

          but the market may provide a number of breakout moves due to economic
          reports.


              Many traders think they are diversified, when in reality they are
              trading the same strategy or idea across multiple, related instru-
              ments. This means they’re taking much more risk than they realize.


               One stock market trader I worked with had a phenomenal track record
          and then stopped making money all of a sudden. On the surface, he was
          well diversified, trading many issues and utilizing options effectively for
          hedging and directional trade. When we reviewed his strategies in detail,
          however, it was clear that all of them relied on bull market trending to
          one degree or another. When the market first went into range-bound mode
          and then into a protracted bear move, he no longer made money. He was
          trading many things without much in the way of diversification. His trading
          business was like a car dealership that sells many kinds of trucks, vans, and
          SUVs. Once large vehicles go out of favor, perhaps due to high fuel costs,
          the business becomes vulnerable. It’s not as diversified as it looks.
               Suppose you track your performance historically and find that your
          strategies correlate at a level of 0.20. The outcome variance shared by the
          strategies would be the square of the correlation—0.04, or 4 percent. That
          means that results from one strategy only account for 4 percent of the vari-
          ation in the other strategy—not a high level. Imagine, however, that dur-
          ing the last month, the correlation soars to 0.70. Now the overlap between
          strategies is close to 50 percent. They are hardly independent.
               What could cause such a jump in correlation? In a strongly trending
          market, the breakouts might all be in one direction—the same direction as
          earnings surprises. Alternatively, you might get caught with an overall mar-
          ket opinion and select your trades to fit that opinion. In either case, your
          diversified business is no longer so diversified, just like the car dealership.


              Correlations among your strategies and trades vary over time
              because of how markets trade and because of your own hidden
              biases.

               That lack of diversification matters, because it means that your capi-
          tal is concentrated on fewer ideas. Your risk is higher, because instead of
          dividing your capital among two or more independent strategies, it is now
          concentrated in what is effectively a single strategy. The same problem oc-
          curs when different markets or asset classes begin trading in a more corre-
          lated fashion, perhaps due to panicky conditions among investors. During

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38   Printer: Yet to come




          246                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          those periods of high risk-aversion, traders will often shun stocks and seek
          the perceived safety of bonds and gold. The three asset classes (equities,
          fixed income, and gold) will thus trade in a highly correlated manner. In-
          stead of being diversified across three markets, your capital is effectively
          concentrated in one.
              When your trading results are becoming more correlated, your self-
          coaching will lead you to ask whether the correlations are due to biases
          in your trade selection or due to shifts among the markets. In the first
          instance, you can make special efforts to seek out uncorrelated ideas; in
          the second, you may want to reduce the size of each of your trades so that
          you have less concentrated risk. What you want to avoid are situations in
          which all your trading and investment eggs are in a single package. That can
          produce fine returns for a while, but leaves a trading business vulnerable
          when market conditions change.
              My coaching experience with traders suggests that they most often
          achieve sound diversification in one or more ways:

            r Blending intraday trading with swing trading or blending longer-term
              trading/investing with shorter-term swing trading.
            r Blending directional trading (being long or short a particular instru-
              ment) with relative value trading (being long one instrument and short
              another, related one).
            r Blending one strategy (such as trading around earnings events) with
              another (trading opening range breakouts).
            r Blending the trading of one market or asset class (such as a currency
              pair) with another (U.S. small cap stocks).

              For example, a trader might be long high-yielding stocks as one idea. A
          second idea would have the trader selling the front end of the yield curve
          and buying the long end, perhaps in anticipation of yield curve flattening
          ahead of Fed tightening. A third idea would have the trader short value
          stocks and long growth issues, anticipating that a historically wide spread
          in performance between the two will revert to its norm. A fourth idea
          might be a short-term long trade on small cap stocks. The good thing about
          spread/pairs trades, such as ideas two and three, is that they can work re-
          gardless of the direction of the underlying market, providing a measure of
          diversification. Trading horizons widen considerably when you don’t just
          ask if a market is going up or down, but start to think about what will go
          up or down versus other things.
              High frequency day traders will tend to achieve diversification and
          low correlation in other ways. They will demonstrate a relatively even
          mix of long and short trades over time. They may also manage positions
          over different time frames or place different trades in different stocks and

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               247

          sectors. The risk for the day trader is getting caught up in fixed opinions
          about the market, biasing trades in a single direction. If the day trader is
          diversified, the correlations among returns from his different setups and
          the serial correlations of returns among trades (and among returns across
          times of day) should be relatively modest over time. Each trade or type of
          trade for the day trader should, in a sense, be a separate product in the
          business mix.


              You don’t have to diversify by trading many markets. You can di-
              versify by time frame (longer-term, shorter-term), directionality
              (long, short), and setup pattern (trending, reversal).


               Is your trading business adequately diversified? Is its diversification
          expanding or narrowing? If you’re like most traders, you don’t know
          the answers to these questions. The data, however, can be at your fin-
          gertips. All you need is to divide your trades by strategy, track the re-
          sults of each strategy daily, and enter the information into Excel. From
          there, it’s simple to calculate correlations over varying time periods. And
          if you don’t trade every day and hold most positions for days? No prob-
          lem: simply calculate the returns of each strategy as if you had sold
          all positions at the end of each trading day. That will tell you if your
          trades are moving in unison or independently. And that will tell you if
          you have many profit centers supporting your business or only a very
          limited few.


                      COACHING CUE

          It is not too diﬃcult to turn good directional ideas into good pairs trades. Once
          you determine that an index, sector, commodity, or stock is going to go up
          or down, ask yourself what related indexes, sectors, commodities, or stocks
          are most likely to maximize this move. You would then buy the instrument
          most likely to maximize the move and sell the related one that is likely to lag.
          For instance, you might think the S&P 500 Index is headed higher. You note
          strength in the NYSE TICK ($TICK) relative to the Dow TICK ($TICKI) and so buy
          the Russell 2000 small caps and sell the Dow Jones Industrials in equal dollar
          amounts. This gives you an idea that can be proﬁtable even if your original idea
          about directionality in the S&P Index doesn’t work out. As long as there’s more
          buying in the broad market than among the large caps in relative terms, you’ll
          make money. Learn to think and trade in terms of relationships so you increase
          your arsenal of ideas.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          248                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 77: CALIBRATE YOUR RISK
          AND REWARD

          I recently used Henry Carstens’ P/L Forecaster (www.verticalsolutions
          .com/tools.html) to simulate possible equity curves under scenarios for two
          small traders:

           1. Trader A has a small negative edge – The trader wins on 48 percent of
              trades and the ratio of the size of winners to losers is 0.90.
           2. Trader B has a small positive edge – The trader wins on 52 percent of
              trades and the ratio of the size of winners to losers is 1.10.

               I viewed the simulation as tracking returns over a 100-day period. The
          average size of winning days was $100 in both scenarios. That means that,
          if we assume that the traders began with a portfolio size of $20,000, that the
          daily variability of their returns was somewhere around 50 basis points (1/2
          percent, or $100/$20,000). If the traders averaged just one trade per day,
          then it’s plausible that they were risking roughly 2 S&P 500 emini points
          per trade and making about that much per trade.
               By running the scenarios 10 times each, I was able to generate an array
          of returns for the two traders:

                 Forecast Number                Trader A                Trader B

                  1                             −$904.2                 $769.9
                  2                              −727.4                  667.5
                  3                              −718.5                  614.7
                  4                              −763.5                  783.8
                  5                              −786.1                  528.7
                  6                              −551.0                  830.4
                  7                              −518.9                  933.0
                  8                              −610.5                  500.7
                  9                              −760.5                  791.5
                 10                              −812.6                  884.2


              What we see is that small edges over time add up. When the small
          edge is negative, as in the case of Trader A, the average portfolio loss over
          100 days is around 3 percent. When the edge is positive, we see that Trader
          B averages a 100-day gain of about 3 percent.
              Clearly, it doesn’t take much to turn a modest positive edge into a
          modest negative one: the distance between 52 percent and 48 percent
          winners and the difference between a win size that is 10 percent smaller
          versus larger than the average loss size are not so great. Just a relatively
          small change in how markets move, how we execute our trades, or how
          well we concentrate and follow our ideas can turn a modest winning edge
          into a consistent loser.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                            249



              You don’t need to have a large edge to run a successful trading
              business; you do need to have a consistent edge.


                Had we tracked results every single day, we would have found that
          Trader A had some winning days and Trader B had some losers. Over a
          series of 100 days, however, the edge manifests itself boldly. There are no
          scenarios in which Trader A is profitable and none where Trader B loses
          money. Just as the edge per bet in a casino leads to reliable earnings for
          the house over time, the edge per trade can create a reliable profit stream
          when sustained over the long run. Once you have your edge, your great-
          est challenge as your own trading coach is to ensure your consistency in
          exploiting that edge, every day, every trade.
                But let’s take the analysis a step further and explore risk and re-
          ward. Our Traders A and B are not great risk takers: they are only trading
          one ES contract for their $20,000 account. This provides them with aver-
          age daily volatility of returns approximating 50 basis points, which is not
          so unusual in the money management world. We can see, however, that
          the 3 percent return for Trader B over 100 days would amount to about
          7.5 percent per year (250 trading days). While that’s not a terrible return,
          it is before commissions and other expenses are deducted. The consistent
          small edge does not produce a large return when risk-taking is modest.
                So how could our Trader B juice his returns? A simple way would
          be to trade 3 contracts instead of 1. Assuming that this does not change
          how Trader B trades, the average daily variability of returns would now be
          1.5 percent, with an average win size of $300. The return of over 20 percent
          per year would now look superior. If you take more risk when you have
          a consistent edge, this certainly makes sense, just as betting more makes
          sense at a casino makes sense if the odds are in your favor. You simply
          need to have deep enough pockets to weather series of losses that are ex-
          pectable even when you do have the edge. When I ran the scenarios for
          Trader B, peak to trough drawdowns of $700 to $800 were evident. Multiply
          that by the factor of 3 and now Trader B incurs drawdowns of 12 percent.
                But what if Trader B took pedal to the metal and traded 10 contracts
          with a small edge? The potential annual return of 75 percent looks fantas-
          tic. The potential drawdowns of more than 40 percent now seem onerous.
          That small, consistent edge suddenly generates large losses when risk is
          ramped to an extreme.


              The variability of your returns will tend to be correlated with the
              variability of your emotions.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          250                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               In that aggressive scenario, Trader B would ramp the variability of
          daily returns to 5 percent. Average daily swings of that magnitude, par-
          ticularly during a slump, are bound to affect the trader’s psyche. Once the
          trader becomes rattled, that small positive edge can turn into a small neg-
          ative one. Amplified by leverage, the trader could easily blow up and lose
          everything, all the while possessing sound trading methods.
               The size of your edge and the variability of your daily returns (which
          is a function of position sizing) will determine the path of your P/L curve.
          Management of that path is crucial to emotional self-management. Your
          assignment is to utilize Henry’s forecaster in the manner illustrated above,
          using your historical information regarding your edge and average win size
          to generate likely paths of your returns. Then play with the average win
          size to find the level of risk, reward, and drawdown that makes trading
          worth your while financially, but that doesn’t overwhelm you with swings
          in your portfolio.
               Few traders truly understand the implications of their trading size,
          given their degree of edge. If you know what you’re likely to make and lose
          in your trading business, you’ll be best able to cope with the lean times and
          not become overconfident when things are good. Match your level of port-
          folio risk to your level of personal risk tolerance for a huge step toward
          trading success.


                      COACHING CUE

          Doubling your position sizing will have the same eﬀect on the path of your re-
          turns as keeping a constant trading size when market volatility doubles. This
          process is a dilemma for traders who hold positions over many days and weeks,
          but is also a challenge for day traders, who experience diﬀerent patterns of
          volatility at diﬀerent parts of the trading day. It is common for traders to iden-
          tify volatility with opportunity and even raise their trading size/risk as markets
          become more volatile. This greatly ampliﬁes the swings of a trading account,
          and it plays havoc with traders’ emotions. Adjusting your risk for the volatility
          of the market is a good way to control your bet size so that a few losses won’t
          wipe out the proﬁts from many days and weeks.




          LESSON 78: THE IMPORTANCE
          OF EXECUTION IN TRADING

          You can have the greatest ideas in the business world, but if they’re not
          executed properly, they won’t be worth much. A great product marketed

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                                251


          poorly won’t sell. A phenomenal game plan by a top coach won’t work
          on the basketball court if the players don’t pass well and can’t establish
          position underneath the basket for rebounds. The quarterback can call a
          great play, but if the line doesn’t block, the pass will never get off.
               So it is with trading: execution is a much larger part of success than
          most traders realize. The average trader spends a great deal of attention on
          getting into a market, but it’s the management of that trade idea that often
          determines its fate. When you are the manager of your trading business,
          you want to focus on day-in and day-out execution, just as you would if
          you were running your own store.
               A trade idea begins with the perception that an index, commodity, or
          stock is likely to be repriced. For example, we may perceive that a stock
          index is trading at one level of value, but is likely to be trading at a different
          level. Our rationale for believing this may be grounded in fundamentals:
          at our forecasted levels of interest rates and earnings growth, the index
          should be trading at X price rather than Y. Our rationale might be purely
          statistical: the spread between March and January options contracts on the
          index is historically high and we anticipate a return to normal levels. Too,
          we may use technical criteria for our inference: the market could not break
          above its long-term range, so we expect it to probe value levels at the lower
          end of the range. In each case, the trade idea takes the form: “We’re trading
          here at this price, but I hypothesize we’ll be trading there at that price.”
               What this suggests is that a fully formed trade idea includes not just
          an entry setup, but also a profit target. Too often that target is not made
          clear and explicit, but still it lies at the heart of any trade idea. A trade only
          makes sense if we expect prices to move in an anticipated way to an extent
          that is meaningful relative to the risk we are taking.

              Just as businesses set target returns on their investments, traders
              target returns on their trade ideas.

               It is in this context that every trade is a hypothesis: our belief re-
          garding the proper pricing of the asset represents our hypothesis, and our
          trade can be thought of as a test of that hypothesis. As markets move,
          they provide incremental support for or disconfirmation of the hypothesis.
          That means that, as trades unfold, we either gain or lose confidence in our
          hypothesis.
               Any good scientist not only knows when a hypothesis is supported,
          but also when it is not finding support. A hypothesis is only meaningful if it
          can be objectively tested and falsified. The outcome that would falsify our
          trade hypothesis is what we set as a stop-loss level. It is the counterpart
          to the target; if the target defines the possible movement in our favor, the

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          252                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          stop-loss point captures the amount of adverse movement we’re willing to
          incur prior to exiting the trade and declaring our hypothesis wrong.
                The trader who lacks clearly defined targets and stop-losses is like the
          scientist who lacks a clear hypothesis. You can trade to see what happens,
          and scientists can play around in the laboratory, but neither is science and
          neither is likely to prove profitable over the long run. A firm hypothesis
          and objective criteria for accepting or rejecting the hypothesis advances
          knowledge. Similarly, a clear trading idea and explicit criteria for validating
          or rejecting the idea can guide our market understanding. Frequently, if
          you get stopped out of a seemingly good trade idea you can reframe your
          understanding of what is going on in the market. After all, scientists learn
          from hypotheses that are not confirmed as well as those that are.
                With the target and stop-loss firmly in mind, we now have the basis for
          executing our idea. Good execution mandates that we enter the trade at a
          price in which the amount of money we would lose if we were wrong (if
          we’re stopped out) is less than the amount of money that we would make
          if we were right (if we reach our target). When traders talk about getting a
          good price, this is what they mean: they are entering an idea with relatively
          little risk and a good deal more potential reward. A good way to think about
          this is to think of each trade as a hand of poker: where we place our stop-
          loss level reflects how much we’re willing to bet on a particular idea.


              Many traders make the mistake of placing stops at a particular dol-
              lar loss level. Rather, you want to place stops at levels that clearly
              tell you that your trade idea is wrong.


               Let’s say my research tells me that we have an excellent chance of
          breaking above the prior day’s high price of $51 per share. We are currently
          trading a bit below $49 after two bouts of morning selling took the stock
          down to $48, which is above the prior day’s low of $47.50. A news item
          favorable to the sector hits the tape and I immediately buy the stock at $49,
          with $51 as my immediate target. My hypothesis is that this news will be
          a catalyst for propelling the stock higher, given that earlier selling could
          not take out yesterday’s low. I’m willing to lose a point on the trade (stop
          myself out at $48) to make two points on the idea (target of $51).
               Suppose, however, that the stock was trading at $50, rather than $49
          when the news came out. Now my risk/reward is not weighted in my favor.
          If I’m willing to accept a move back to $48 before concluding I’m wrong, I
          now have two points of potential loss for a single point of targeted profit.
          While the idea is the same, the execution is quite different. It is difficult to
          make money over the long haul if you’re consistently risking two dollars

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                                 253


          to make one. If, however, you’re risking a dollar to make two or more, you
          can be right less than half the time and still wind up in the plus column.


              Good execution means that you calibrate risk as a function of an-
              ticipated reward.


               Execution provides proactive risk management. If you control how
          much you can win and lose based on your price of entry, you keep your
          risk known and lower than your potential reward. You can track the qual-
          ity of your execution if you calculate the amount of heat you take on your
          average trades. Heat is the amount of adverse price movement that occurs
          while you’re in the trade. If you’re taking a great deal of heat to make a
          small amount of money, you’re obviously courting disaster. When your ex-
          ecution is good, you should take relatively little heat compared to the size
          of your gains. Your assignment for this lesson is to calculate heat for each
          of your recent trades and track that over time. This assignment will tell
          you how successful you are at executing your ideas, and it will provide a
          sensitive measure of changing risk/reward in your trading.
               Good execution, psychologically, is all about patience. To get a good
          price, you will have to lay off some trade ideas that end up being profitable.
          Like the poker player, you want to bet when the odds are clearly in your
          favor. That means mucking a lot of hands. Similarly, a business doesn’t try
          to be all things to all people. A business owner passes up certain opportu-
          nities to sell products in order to focus on what she does best. When you’re
          running your trading business well, you don’t take every conceivable op-
          portunity to make money; you wait for your highest probability opportuni-
          ties. The clearer you are about risk and reward, the easier it will be to stick
          to trades that offer favorable expected returns.


                      COACHING CUE

          A simple rule that has greatly aided my executions has been to wait for buyers
          to take their turn if I’m selling the market and wait for sellers to take their turn
          before I’m buying the market. Thus, I can only buy if the NYSE TICK has gone
          negative and if the last X price bars are down. Similarly, I can only sell if the
          NYSE TICK has gone positive and the most recent X price bars have been up.
          This reduces the heat I take on trades by entering after short squeezes and
          program trades juke the market up or down. Once in a while you’ll miss a trade
          if you wait patiently for the other side to take their turn, but the extra ticks you
          make on the trades you do get into more than make up for that.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          254                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 79: THINK IN THEMES—
          GENERATING GOOD TRADING IDEAS

          Notice how successful businesses are always coming up with new products
          and services to meet the changing needs and demands of consumers. A
          great way to become obsolescent in the business world is to remain static.
          If a current product is a hit, competitors and imitators are sure to follow.
          What was hot at one time—large vehicles during periods of cheap gaso-
          line, compact disc players for music—can go cold quite suddenly when
          economic conditions or technologies change.
               It is the same way in the trading world. For a while, buying technol-
          ogy stocks was a sure road to success. Thousands of day traders gave up
          their jobs to seek their fortunes. After 2000, that trade vanished with a se-
          vere bear market. Now, selected technology firms are doing relatively well,
          while others languish. Markets, like consumer tastes, are never static.
               As we saw in the lesson on diversification, if you base your trading
          business on a single type of trading—a limited set of ideas or patterns—it
          is a vulnerable place to be. I recall when breakouts of opening ranges were
          profitable trades; in recent years, those breakouts have tended to reverse.
          We all hear that the trend is your friend, but in recent years buying after los-
          ing days, weeks, and months has—on average—been more profitable than
          selling. Market patterns, as Niederhoffer emphasized, are ever-changing.
          That means that successful traders, like successful business people, must
          continually scout for fresh opportunity.


              The best system developers don’t just develop and trade a single
              system. Rather, they continually test and trade new systems as part
              of a diversified mix.

               One of the skills I see in the best traders is the ability to synthesize
          data across markets, asset classes, and time frames to generate trading
          themes. These themes are narratives that the trader constructs to make
          sense of what is going on in markets. These themes are the trader’s theories
          of the financial marketplace. Their trades are tests of these theories. The
          successful trader is one who generates and acts on good theories: themes
          that truly capture what is happening and why.
               This thematic thinking is common in the portfolio management world,
          but I see it also among successful short-term traders. The scope of the
          theories—and the data used to generate them—may differ, but the process
          is remarkably similar. A portfolio manager might note high gasoline prices
          and weakening housing values and conclude that a lack of discretionary
          income among consumers should hurt consumer discretionary stocks.
          That might lead to a trade in which the manager shorts the consumer

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                              255

          discretionary sector and buys consumer staples stocks that are more
          recession-proof.
              The short-term trader may look at a Market Profile graphic covering
          the past week and observe a broad trading range, with the majority of vol-
          ume transacted in the middle of that range. As the market moves to the top
          of that range, the trader sees that many sectors are nowhere near break-
          ing out. Moreover, overall market volume is light during the move, with as
          much volume transacted at the market bid as at the offer. From this config-
          uration, the short-term trader theorizes that there is not sufficient demand
          to push the market’s value area higher. She then places a trade to sell the
          market, in anticipation of a move back into the middle of the range.


              Thematic thinking turns market data into market hypotheses.


               The key to thematic thinking is the synthesizing of a range of data into
          a coherent picture. Many traders, particularly beginners, only look at their
          market in their time frame. Their view is myopic; all they see are shapes
          on a chart. The factors that actually catalyze the movement of capital—
          news, economic conditions, tests of value areas, intraday and longer-term
          sentiment—remain invisible to them. Without the ability to read the mar-
          ket’s themes, they trade the same way under all market conditions. They’ll
          trade breakout moves in trending markets and in slow, choppy ones.
          They’ll fade gaps whether currencies and interest rates are impelling a
          repricing of markets or not. Little wonder that they are mystified when
          their trading suddenly turns from green to red: they don’t understand why
          markets are behaving as they are.
               There is much to be said for keeping trading logic simple. The synthesis
          of market data into coherent themes is a great way to distill a large amount
          of information into actionable patterns. In the quest for simplicity, how-
          ever, traders can gravitate to the simplistic. A setup—a particular configu-
          ration of prices or oscillators—may aid execution of a trade idea, but it is
          not an explanation of why you think a market is going to do what you antic-
          ipate. The clearer you are about the logic of your trade, the clearer you’ll be
          about when the trade is going in your favor and when it is going against you.
               Intermarket relationships are particularly fertile ground for the devel-
          opment of themes. You’ll notice in the TraderFeed blog that I regularly
          update how sectors of the stock market are trading relative to one an-
          other. This alerts us to themes of economic growth and weakness, as well
          as to lead-lag relationships in the market. These sector themes change
          periodically—financial issues that had been market leaders recently be-
          came severe laggards—but they tend to be durable over the intermediate-
          term, setting up worthwhile trade ideas for active traders.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          256                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Other intermarket themes capture the relative movements of asset
          classes. When the economy weakens and the Federal Reserve has to lower
          interest rates, this has implications not only for how bonds trade, but also
          the U.S. dollar. Lower rates and a weaker dollar might also support the
          prospects of companies that do business overseas, as their goods will be
          cheaper for consumers in other countries. That situation might set up some
          promising stock market ideas.

              Track rises and falls in correlations among sectors and markets as
              a great way to detect emerging themes—and ones that are shifting.


               Short-term traders can detect themes from how markets trade in
          Europe and Asia before the U.S. markets open. Are interest rates rising
          or falling? Commodities? The U.S. dollar? Are overnight traders behav-
          ing in a risk-averse way or are they buying riskier assets and selling safer
          ones? Are Asian or European markets breaking out to new value levels on
          their economic news or on decisions from their central banks? Often, these
          overnight events affect the morning trade in the United States and set up
          trade ideas about whether a market is likely to move to new highs or lows
          relative to the prior day.
               The short-term trader can also develop themes from breaking news
          and the behavior of sectors that are leading or lagging the market. If you
          keep track of stocks and sectors making new highs and lows often, you
          will highlight particular themes that are active in the market. If oil prices
          are strong, you may notice that the shares of alternative energy companies
          are making new highs. That can be an excellent theme to track. Similarly,
          in the wake of a credit crunch, you might find that banking stocks are mak-
          ing new lows. Catching these themes early is the very essence of riding
          trends; after all, a theme may persist even as the broad market remains
          range bound.
               As your own trading coach and the manager of your trading business,
          you need to keep abreast of the marketplace. That means that consider-
          able reading and observation must accompany trading time in front of the
          screen. On my blog, I try to highlight sources of information that are partic-
          ularly relevant to market themes. I update those themes daily with tweets
          from the Twitter messaging application (www.twitter.com/steenbab). Ulti-
          mately, however, you need to figure out the themes that most make sense
          to you and the sources of information for generating and tracking those
          themes. The more you understand about markets, the more you’ll under-
          stand what is happening in your market. Like a quarterback, you need to
          see the entire playing field to make the right calls; it’s too easy to be blind-
          sided by a blitzing linebacker when your gaze is fixed!

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                               257


                      COACHING CUE

          It is particularly promising to ﬁnd themes that result from a particular news
          catalyst. For instance, if a report on the economy is stronger than expected and
          you see sustained buying, track the sectors and stocks leading the move early
          on and consider trading them for a trending move, especially if they hold up well
          on market pullbacks. Many of those themes can run for several days, setting up
          great swing moves.




          LESSON 80: MANAGE THE TRADE

          Business success isn’t just about the products and services a firm offers
          to the public. Much of success can be traced to the management of the
          business. If you don’t hire the right people, supervise them properly, track
          inventories, and stick to a budget, you’ll fail to make money with even the
          best products and services.
               So it is with trading. The best traders I’ve known are quite skilled at
          managing trades. By trade management, I mean something different from
          generating the trade idea and executing it. Rather, I’m referring to what you
          do with the position after you’ve entered it and before you’ve exited.
               Your first reaction might be: You don’t do anything! It’s certainly pos-
          sible to enter a position and sit in it, waiting for it to hit your profit target
          or your stoploss level. That reaction, however, is inefficient. It’s like sell-
          ing the same mix of products at all stores even though some products sell
          better and some sell worse at particular locations.
               To appreciate why this is the case, consider the moment you enter
          a trade. At that point you have a minimum of information regarding the
          soundness of your idea. As the market trades following your entry, you
          accumulate fresh data about your idea: the action is either supporting or
          not supporting your reasons for being in the market. For instance, if your
          idea is predicated on falling interest rates and you see bonds break out
          of a price range, that would be supportive of your trade. If you anticipate
          an upside breakout in stocks and you see volume expand and the NYSE
          TICK move to new highs for the day on an upward move, that is similarly
          supportive. If you track market action and themes while the trade is on,
          you can update the odds of your trade being successful.


              Trade management is the set of decisions you make based on the
              fresh information that accumulates during the trade.

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      7:38     Printer: Yet to come




          258                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               One way that I see traders utilizing this information is in the way that
          they scale into trades. Their initial position size might be relatively small,
          but traders will add to the position as fresh information validates their idea.
          My trading capital per trade idea is divided into six units. I typically will en-
          ter a position with one or two units. Only if the idea is finding support will
          a third or fourth unit enter the picture. I have found that, if my trades are
          going to be wrong, they’re generally wrong early in their lifespan. By en-
          tering with minimal size, I incur small drawdowns when I’m wrong. If I
          add to a position as it is finding support, I maximize the gains from good
          trades. This trade management, I find, is just as important to many
          traders’ performance as the quality of their initial ideas. Indeed, I’ve seen
          traders throw lots of trade ideas at the wall and only add capital to the ones
          that stick: the management of their trades makes all the difference to their
          returns.
               Such trade management means that you have to be actively engaged
          in processing information while the trade is on, not just passively watch-
          ing your position. Good trade management is quite different from chasing
          markets that happen to be going in your favor. It is a separate execution
          process unto itself, in which you can wait for normal pullbacks against
          your position to add to the position at favorable levels. If you are long, for
          example, and the market is in an uptrend, the retracements should occur
          at successively higher price levels. By adding after the retracement, you
          gain the profit potential when the market returns to its prior peak, but you
          also ensure that risk/reward will be favorable for the piece of the trade that
          you’re adding.


              Each piece added to a trade needs a separate assessment of risk
              and reward to guide its execution.


               While I’m in a short-term trade, I’m closely watching intraday senti-
          ment for clues as to whether buyers or sellers are more aggressive in the
          market. I will watch the NYSE TICK (the number of stocks trading on
          upticks minus those trading on downticks), and I will track the Market
          Delta (www.marketdelta.com; the volume of ES futures transacted at the
          market offer minus the volume transacted at the market bid). These track-
          ings tell me if the balance of sentiment is in my direction. If the sentiment
          turns against me, I may decide to discretionarily exit the position prior to
          hitting my stop-loss level. That, too, is part of trade management. To be
          sure, it is risky to front-run stop-levels: it invites impulsive behavior when-
          ever markets tick against you. I’ve found, however, that if I’m long the ES
          futures and we see a breakdown in the Russell 2000 (ER2) futures or a
          move to new lows in a couple of key market sectors, the odds are good

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          Coaching Your Trading Business                                            259

          that we will not trend higher. By proactively exiting the position, I save
          myself money and can position myself for the next trade.
               What this suggests is that it is important to be right in the markets,
          but it is even more valuable to know when you’re right. Very success-
          ful traders, I find, press their advantage when they know they’re right,
          and they’re good at knowing when they’re right. This means that they are
          keen observers of markets in real time, able to assess when their trade
          ideas—their hypotheses—are working out and when they’re not. They are
          good traders because they’re good managers of their trades.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to assess your trade management as
          a separate profit center. Do you scale into trade ideas? Do you act aggres-
          sively on your best ideas when you are right? If you’re like many traders,
          this is an underdeveloped part of your trading business. It may take a return
          to simulation mode and practice with small additions to trades to cultivate
          your trade management skills. It may also mean that you structure your
          time while you’re in trades, highlighting the information most relevant for
          the management of your particular idea. Most of all it means cultivating
          an aggressive mindset for those occasions when you know you have the
          market nailed.
               As your own trading coach, you want to make the most of your assets.
          It’s easy to identify traders who exit the business because they lose money.
          It’s harder to appreciate the equally large number of traders who never
          meet their potential because they don’t make the most of their winning
          ideas. A great exercise is to add to every position at least once on paper
          after you’ve made your real-money entry. Then track the execution of your
          added piece, its profitability, the heat you take on it, etc. In short, treat
          trade management the way you would treat trading a totally new market,
          with its own learning curve and need for practice and feedback. You don’t
          have to be right all the time; the key is to know when you’re right and make
          the most of those opportunities.


                     COACHING CUE

          Track your trades in which you exit the market prior to your stops being hit.
          Does that discretionary trade management save you money or cost you money?
          It’s important to understand your management practices and whether they add
          value to your business.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the

P1: JYS
c08     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008      7:38    Printer: Yet to come




          260                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          8: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-eight-links.html
               Jim Dalton’s books are excellent resources when it comes to develop-
          ing a conceptual framework for trading. I recommend Mind Over Markets
          as a first read, then Markets in Profile. Both books are available on the site
          where Jim and Terry Liberman offer training for developing traders:
          www.marketsinprofile.com
               An excellent book on risk and risk management is Kenneth L. Grant’s
          text Trading Risk (Wiley, 2004).
               Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) are an excellent tool for achieving di-
          versification. Two good introductions to ETFs are David H. Fry’s book Cre-
          ate Your Own ETF Hedge Fund (Wiley, 2008) and Richard A. Ferri’s text
          The ETF Book (Wiley, 2008).
               I receive a number of questions regarding seminars, courses, and other
          resources that are offered for sale under the general rubric of trading ed-
          ucation. My impression, and the feedback I get from blog readers, is that
          these offerings are often expensive and of limited relevance to the partic-
          ular strengths and interests of individual traders. Similarly, I receive many
          inquiries into proprietary trading firms, which allow traders to trade the
          firm’s capital in exchange for a share of profits. Some of these firms are
          quite professional and ethical; others are not. I strongly encourage due dili-
          gence: talk to a number of people who have taken these courses or who are
          trading at these firms. If you cannot get direct feedback from actual users
          (not just one or two stooges), move on. Don’t pay thousands of dollars for
          something unless you know exactly what you’re getting.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




                                      CHAPTER 9


                              Lessons from
                                 Trading
                              Professionals
                           Resources and Perspectives
                               on Self-Coaching


                    Anyone who fights for the future lives in it today.
                                                             —Ayn Rand



             n this chapter, I sought the perspectives of experienced traders who

         I   share their views on the Web. The question I asked them was simple:


              “What are the three things you have found most helpful in mentor-
              ing/coaching yourself as a trader?”


               I think you’ll find their outlooks worthwhile, and I know you’ll benefit
          from checking into the resources these traders provide. To coach yourself,
          you don’t need to reinvent wheels. The guidance of those who have come
          before you can be invaluable. Think of this chapter as lessons in the best
          practices of self-coaching. Look for the themes emphasized by a majority
          of the contributors; these themes include the best of the best practices.



          LESSON 81: LEVERAGE CORE
          COMPETENCIES AND CULTIVATE
          CREATIVITY

          We encountered Henry Carstens when we took a look at profits and losses
          as a function of one’s trading metrics. Henry’s web site (www.vertical
          solutions.com) is filled with valuable information for discretionary traders,

                                                                                     261

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          262                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          but his distinct specialty is the design of trading systems. Henry eats his
          own cooking: he builds and trades his own systems, manages money for
          clients with his systems, and develops trading systems for other traders
          and trading firms. When I posed the question to him of what he has found
          most helpful in coaching himself, he quickly offered three responses:

           1. Leveraging core competencies and interests
           2. Learning about learning
           3. Collaboration and work ethic

              Let’s take a look at each.
              From childhood, Henry learned about building and the use of machin-
          ery from his grandfather, Floyd Grahm. “I am, and have always been, a
          heavy equipment operator,” Henry observes. Out of his fascination with
          machines and moving things around, Henry tried his hand at a different
          kind of building: he built a machine that traded. After building several
          such machines, he figured out a way to quantify rates of change in market
          behavior. When he tossed aside all but one of his machines, Henry devel-
          oped others, so that his machines would never rust and become obsolete.
          His core competence and interest is building: markets just happen to be the
          earth he is currently moving. Henry leveraged what he knows and loves and
          found success and fulfillment.


              Success is found by leveraging distinctive interests, talents, and
              skills: doing what you love, and doing what you do well.


              Note, however, that the flip side of building is destroying. Sometimes
          you have to take down a structure to erect a new one; you have to remove a
          mound of earth to lay a foundation for something new. It was Henry’s will-
          ingness to put aside his old machines and develop new ones that provided
          him with his edge. It’s not about finding a perfect system and taking cash
          from it like an ATM. It’s about having the integrity to acknowledge when
          ideas are no longer working and having the desire to be the best machine
          operator possible.
              With respect to learning about learning, Henry credits his chess lessons
          with grandmaster Nigel Davies for helping him become sensitive to pat-
          terns and their nuances. “What I learned from those lessons was the power
          of nuance—the cascading insights brought by experience and the contin-
          uous pursuit of a single objective,” he explains. Henry has learned to scan
          markets like he scans a chessboard for moves. “I continually search for the
          next insight now, the nuance that means just a bit of an edge for just a little
          while longer.”

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          263


               I’ve observed this interdisciplinary cross-fertilization among many suc-
          cessful traders. Those traders with mathematical backgrounds learn to
          quantify value and divergences from value. Those with athletic training use
          their experience to guide their training and direct their competitive drive.
          My own work in psychology has sensitized me to the ways in which human
          behavior is patterned. This work has been a tremendous aid in recogniz-
          ing similar patterns in markets. Coaching yourself begins with knowing
          yourself, and especially knowing your distinctive strengths: how you best
          process information, how you think, what you love. It is difficult to imagine
          being successful at trading if your market activity does not tap into these
          core competencies and values.
               Finally, Henry identifies collaboration and a strong work ethic as key to
          his self-development. “A diverse network of people with broad and similar
          interests in trading both pushed and supported me,” Henry explains. “The
          very strong work ethic I got from my grandfather always makes me do just
          a little bit more.” The keys here are that the network is diverse—providing
          input from many angles to aid creativity—and the network is both chal-
          lenging and supportive. I’ve often been asked why I don’t charge money for
          my blog content. The answer is that, in developing a community of read-
          ers, I also cultivate the diverse network described by Henry. Readers push
          me to think more deeply about markets, and they support my efforts at
          learning more. All of us tend to fall into the trap of operating within our
          comfort zones. We benefit when those who care about us also push us to
          move beyond those self-imposed boundaries.
               Like many successful creative individuals, Henry exemplifies what I
          call an open source approach to networking. When others share ideas and
          research with him, he freely passes his work on to them. This approach is
          very common among professional portfolio managers, particularly the suc-
          cessful ones. A surprising number of traders, however, are convinced that
          they must keep their work secret. The result is that they become isolated
          and stagnant. “When a colleague sends me something that I build upon or
          that sets me off on a new and interesting direction, I always try to recipro-
          cate with a relevant finding or study as way of thanks,” Henry points out.
          “What I give up in secrecy comes back many-fold in strong relationships
          and flow of ideas that are the lifeblood of the creator.”

              The trader must be a creator if his business is to avoid stagnation.

              I cannot emphasize this latter point strongly enough: as a trader, you
          are only as strong as your flow of ideas. Those ideas are your lifeblood: the
          novel mutations that will enable you to evolve and adapt to changing mar-
          ket conditions. Success in trading is a kind of evolution; without creativity

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          264                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          and the ongoing flow of ideas, extinction is a real threat—as it is for any
          business that fails to keep up with the marketplace.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to set a goal and plan for becom-
          ing just a bit more creative in your approach to markets. You don’t have
          to be a system developer to learn about learning, build upon your distinc-
          tive strengths, and fertilize your creativity within a network of colleagues.
          For your assignment, I encourage you to add just one source of new ideas
          that will add to and challenge your own. This source can be a web site,
          a newsletter, or a peer trader—but it should be a source that you can
          consult as a regular part of your generation of trading ideas. Henry freely
          shares his experience on his site, including a framework for testing trading
          ideas; making use of the fruits of his self-coaching will be invaluable for
          your own.


                     COACHING CUE

          When we’re successful, our work expresses who we are. Henry emphasizes
          that he is a builder and creator. How does your trading express who you are:
          your greatest talents and interests? Identify the recent times in the markets
          when you have been your happiest and most fulﬁlled. What made those times
          special? How can you bring those special elements into your trading more
          regularly?




          LESSON 82: I ALONE AM RESPONSIBLE

          Chris Czirnich, author of the Globetrader blog (www.globetrader
          .blogspot.com), was one of the first contributors I considered for this chap-
          ter. Uniquely among market writers, Chris is sensitive to the psychology of
          trading. His blog consistently combines market insights and psychological
          ones; it’s a useful resource.
               I posed the three-pronged question to Chris, asking him what has been
          most helpful for his self-coaching as a trader. The floodgates opened and
          Chris came up with 10 ideas, not three. His response was so well consid-
          ered that I decided to summarize all 10 of his insights and their implications
          for self-coaching:

           1. Being able to observe myself.
           2. Discipline.
           3. Having an edge.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           265


           4. Accepting that I alone am responsible.
           5. There is no holy grail.
           6. Having trust in myself.
           7. Being able to stand up again, after being beaten down.
           8. Being lucky from time to time.
           9. Keeping a trading journal and writing a blog.
         10. Don’t panic.


              Building the External Observer
              “The external observer is a concept I came across after reading your
              first book,” Chris explains. “It allows me to see myself trading, to ob-
              serve and interact in case I’m in a position from a teacher’s perspective.
              It allows me to argue about my trade, to see the pros and cons, to no-
              tice price behavior I might miss otherwise. It’s an invaluable resource
              in a trade because it is not affected by emotions and will guide me,
              even in a fast-moving market. I rely on it to always know what I should
              do. I might override it, but it is the clear voice in a turbulent market,
              where I can always turn to find the safe way out.”

              Maintaining Discipline
              “Discipline is so elusive, so difficult to maintain, and yet it is something
              without which you won’t succeed at trading,” Chris explains. “Am I a
              disciplined trader? Alas no, unfortunately not, but after all these years
              I have learned that I have to follow certain rules or I will do a lot of
              damage to my account. Let’s look at a concept that every trading book
              tells you is wrong and will lead to disaster: adding to a losing posi-
              tion. Admit it, you have done it at times, because you were certain that
              you were right and the market was wrong. My biggest loss came from
              adding to a losing position; still on a range day, adding to a losing po-
              sition is the way to trade, because otherwise, you will die the death
              of a thousand stops. Yes I add to losing positions, but now I have the
              discipline to stick to the twice wrong and I’m out rule. Meaning, if the
              add-on does not work, I’m out. Of course you can be wrong and a trade
              signal might go against you, but if you have two signals in a row that
              go against you, then you have to take a step back and see why your
              signals aren’t working properly.”


              Rules promote discipline.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          266                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Having an Edge
              “Without an edge you are doomed,” Chris asserts. “Very simple. Of
              course you might throw a coin and trade a 50:50 chance system. But
              only a professional will have the discipline to stick to the necessary
              money management rules to trade a 50:50 system successfully. Hav-
              ing an edge means you can statistically prove that your trading system
              works, that it would have paid your commissions and costs of doing
              business and made you profits in the long run. You might be a mechan-
              ical trader, you might trade fundamentals, you might trade price action
              or some arcane indicator or a combination of all of them. It all comes
              down to one thing only: You must be able to prove to yourself that your
              trading system works and will make you profits in the long run. If you
              can’t prove that to yourself, if you don’t understand the mechanics be-
              hind your trading system, then you won’t trust your trading system and
              you will not be able to trade it. The best trading system will produce
              losses in the hands of a trader who does not believe that that trading
              system works.”

              I Alone Am Responsible
              “I came to trading because I came into real financial difficulties after
              some clients of mine went bankrupt and did not pay their bills” Chris
              recounts. “Trading seemed the solution to me, because only trading
              gave me the promise of instant payment, of knowing that when I did
              it right I would get paid. But that promise came with a responsibility I
              did not fully understand: I alone am responsible for any action taken.
              There is no one but me to blame, if I have a red day, a red week, a
              red month or year. Each and every day I can look back and tell you
              where I was wrong, what trade I should have taken, where I missed
              the opportunity to make it back. It’s only me who is responsible. And
              if I alone am responsible, then there can’t be any guru to whom I can
              turn to tell me what to do. I trade my system. I can tell you what I
              do, but whether you will be able to use that knowledge depends on
              you alone.”


              The need for a guru confesses an absence of self-guidance.


              There Is No Holy Grail
              “The charts of the best traders have price bars only or they trade with-
              out charts at all, like many forex traders,” Chris explains. “They are not

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          267

              magicians, but they follow the price of the instruments they trade for
              such a long time, they no longer need indicators or charts. But if you
              ask them, they will tell you that there is divergence on price and that
              a bottom or top might be near, that right now will be a great buying or
              selling opportunity. All these traders have looked at charts, they have
              used all the common and not so common indicators or oscillators or
              volume analysis and after a while they removed them from their charts
              until they were back at the beginning looking at a bare chart, but now
              knowing that there is no holy grail among these indicators. Nothing
              will give you 100 percent winning trades, so it’s futile to search for it.
              You need to focus your efforts somewhere else to succeed.”

              Having Trust in Yourself
              “I’m a discretionary trader,” Chris points out. “This means that I have
              certain trade rules, which provide me with a trade setup, but I decide
              on a, let’s call it gut feeling whether I take the trade or not. I have
              tried a few times already to build a successful mechanical trading sys-
              tem, but I was never able to boil my trade rules down to a mechanical
              system that I could trust enough to trade. On the other hand I have
              accepted that my subconscious mind is a better computer than my me-
              chanical skills will ever be. Maybe if I tried my hands at neural nets,
              I could come up with a working mechanical trade system, but then I
              would not understand the rules any longer and that means I would not
              trust it enough to trade it. The subconscious mind will not give clear
              instructions; it communicates through feelings. You need to learn to
              listen to them, if you want to use its power. But if you do, it can be
              a nearly unlimited resource you shouldn’t ignore. To teach or program
              your subconscious mind to do its job, you need to invest a lot of screen
              time. You need to expose it to as many situations as possible . . . to de-
              velop that trust in yourself, the trust that you will always do what’s
              right for you.”


              If you don’t trust yourself or your methods, you will not find the
              emotional resilience to weather periods of loss.


              Standing Up after Being Beaten Down
              “Being bankrupt, having a real bad day: yes it happens,” Chris explains.
              “Many traders trading for their own account will have gone through
              such a slump not once but multiple times before they manage to de-
              velop their account. When I started trading, I had lost a huge amount

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          268                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              of money in funds. I had trusted the fund managers to do a good job;
              instead they did a lousy job and I decided I could do better! It wasn’t
              easy. Somewhere I read that if you can’t trade 1 futures contract suc-
              cessfully, why do you think you can trade 10 contracts successfully?
              That was a statement I could accept and actually still follow to this
              day. So I gave myself a $3,000 account and started trading futures.
              (I never encountered the problems I had in my trading when trading
              in demo mode, so I traded real most of the time). I went bankrupt
              (actually below $2,000, which was the limit I had to maintain to con-
              tinue trading) at least five times. I funded my account with about
              $20,000 over the last seven years and made it all back within three
              months, when I finally got it right. I’m not out of the woods today, but
              I have started taking out money for my living from my account. I still
              have days where I screw up big time and need to build myself up again;
              where I need to question my plan, myself, and my approach to the mar-
              kets. But I know today that I can trade and that I have an edge. I trust
              myself to do what is necessary to do, even when I screw up. I know I
              will stand up again and make it back.”


              Mastering great challenges yields great confidence.


              Luck
              “There is no room for luck in trading? Don’t believe that for one sec-
              ond,” Chris asserts. “How many trades did you do and looking back
              you know you were just lucky to get out breakeven or make a huge
              windfall profit? I always think I’m entitled to two or three lucky trades
              per month. But make sure you know you got away lucky. Don’t bask
              in the glory of that wonderful trade, when all you did was violate your
              rules, add to that lousy entry, and then have the luck to ride a spike
              against the prevailing trend right to the tip.”

              Keep a Detailed Trade Journal and Write a Blog
              “You need to be totally honest with yourself,” Chris advises. “There
              is no rock to hide under if you screw up. It shows in your account and
              you need to document it. Otherwise you will do the same mistakes over
              and over. Believe me, you will still do the same mistakes over and over
              again, even when you write a journal, but at least now you know you
              made the same mistake again. A trading journal can provide you with
              the statistics necessary to develop trust in yourself. It will tell you if
              you have an edge. It can tell you which approach to the markets works

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          269

              and which was a big failure. The trading journal I use today goes back
              more than four years now, and I made about 5,500 trades in that time.
              It is an invaluable source of information about myself and the ways I
              handle certain types of markets. If I encounter a rough patch in the
              markets I can look back and see if I had a similar experience in the
              past. I can see how I handled the situation then, whether my solution
              was successful, or whether I should better try a different approach to-
              day. Usually before I screw up big time, I have a few days with smaller
              and smaller profits. Looking back I see that I felt insecure in the mar-
              kets: something was changing and I was not changing with the market.
              So I struggled to keep the green until something snapped and suddenly
              I was totally and absolutely wrong. The next day or two, I often make it
              back before I have a second deep red down day. After that I usually get
              back on track with smaller profits. The account starts to consolidate
              before I manage the next trend move.
                   “Writing the Globetrader blog I maintain to this day has made me
              accountable. I started the blog because I hoped that by sharing my ap-
              proach to the markets, older, wiser traders would read it and question
              me or point me in a different direction by commenting on my ideas.
              Fortunately for me some of the comments I received proved invalu-
              able and are now an integral part of my trading system. You don’t need
              to write a public blog, but writing about your thoughts in a trade, how
              you see the markets, or what constitutes a trade setup structures your
              approach to the markets. Right now I’m at a point in my development
              as a trader where I try to dissect that gut feeling I wrote about earlier,
              so I can consciously see why my subconscious mind just gave me a
              clear Go ahead and take that trade signal. Or why it just questioned an
              otherwise wonderful looking signal and is proven right a minute later.
              By writing about these trade setups, I can relive the feelings I had when
              the trade opportunity presented itself in real time. Eventually I can see
              why the trade setup actually was not an opportunity. The blog is also
              the place to deal with all the demons and obstructions you will en-
              counter in your trading. Writing about the problems is the first step to
              solving them. As long as you have no mechanical automated trade sys-
              tem, you have to accept that you are human and will make mistakes.
              You need to deal with them and you will have to find ways to avoid or
              integrate them or you will not make it in trading. But the first step is
              always to bring them in the open, so they can no longer hide.”


              Start a blog as a great way to journal your ideas and interact with
              others about them.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          270                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Don’t Panic
              “These are the famous words found on the cover of the Hitchhikers
              Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams,” Chris explains. “They are
              so true in trading. If you panic, your instincts take over, and these in-
              stincts will surely cause the maximum possible damage to your ac-
              count. If the market suddenly starts to drop big time and you are long,
              don’t be frozen; believe what you see and act. Or decide not to act and
              execute your contingency plan. You need to have a plan for every situ-
              ation. Usually you will pay for every lesson the market gives you. How
              much you pay is totally up to you . . . So if I’m suddenly in an unwanted
              position, I look at the chart and see if I like the position or not. If not,
              I’m out. Simple as that. Otherwise I manage the trade. But never ever
              allow panic to take over.”

               Chris’s lessons are the result of hard-won experience. His attitude of
          taking full responsibility for all aspects of trading lies at the heart of self-
          coaching: you are the author of the story of your trading career. Your ac-
          tions will determine the plot and ending of that story. One of Chris’s lessons
          that I like best is the notion of standing up after being beaten down. His suc-
          cess came as a result of resilience: he lost small amounts of money many
          times before he started to trade well and trade larger. Your assignment
          for this lesson is to create a disaster plan for your trading that explains
          how and when you will cut your trading size/risk when you are not trading
          well, but also how you will stand up and persevere with your best trad-
          ing ideas to bring yourself out of drawdown. The best traders are quick to
          pull in their horns when they’re not trading well, but they are not quick
          to give up on their trading. If you develop and follow your disaster plans,
          you take responsibility for your trading and place yourself in control of
          your market participation. As Chris notes, we cannot repeal uncertainty,
          but we can avoid the poor decisions that come from panic and lack of
          preparation.



                      COACHING CUE

          Make sure your trading journal highlights important lessons learned, so that
          it becomes a constructive tool for review months and years later. The value of
          a journal is in its review, not just its initial writing. If you ensure that every
          journal entry has a lesson for the future, you also ensure that today’s learning
          can enrich tomorrow.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          271


          LESSON 83: CULTIVATE
          SELF-AWARENESS

          Trevor Harnett enjoys an interesting perspective on the trading world.
          He is a seasoned trader, and he is someone who runs a software firm
          that provides tools for traders. As a result, he has observed his learning
          curve, but also the curves of traders who utilize his Market Delta soft-
          ware (www.marketdelta.com). While Market Delta incorporates a number
          of charting features, the heart of the program is its ability to separate vol-
          ume traded at the market’s offer price and volume transacted at the bid.
          This distinction enables traders to obtain instantaneous readings of short-
          term sentiment. This is very valuable for intraday traders, and it provides a
          useful execution tool for longer timeframe traders.
              Michael Seneadza is a full-time trader and author of the Trader Mike
          blog (www.tradermike.net). When I first entered the world of blogging,
          Michael’s was one of the very first blogs I read regularly. It seemed to me
          that he had a fine grasp for short-term trading, including the news items
          that move markets. His blog posts the stocks he’s following for the day,
          as well as market and news updates. Michael keeps it real—his site is de-
          void of hype and self-promotion—which helps account for its popularity.
          I grouped Trevor and Michael together for this lesson because they both
          touched on an important facet of self-coaching: being self-aware and act-
          ing as one’s own psychologist.
              When I asked Trevor for the three things that have most contributed
          to his self-coaching, he replied, “Upon looking back at my trading career,
          the three factors that have influenced my trading the most are 1) the envi-
          ronment I put myself into, 2) the discipline I exercised as a trader and else
          where in my life, and 3) self-awareness in terms of personality and how I
          viewed the markets.” Let’s take a look at those.

              Environment
              When Trevor started trading, he made sure that he was close to the ac-
              tion and rented an office in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange building.
              “I had plenty of desire but little knowledge and few friends or men-
              tors to show me the way,” Trevor explains. “Being in an environment
              with lots of seasoned traders was important to me.” Trevor learned
              most from these traders’ mistakes. “A majority of what I learned by
              being around other traders was what not to do,” Trevor pointed out.
              “I learned valuable lessons from other traders, but the lessons that
              have kept me trading over the years are the lessons I learned from
              other traders on not what to do. For me, being in an environment that

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          272                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              consisted of more than just my own experiences increased my rate of
              learning tremendously. I was able to share in others successes and de-
              feats and learn from what they did right and wrong. To me this was
              invaluable because some of the experiences they had to endure were
              ones that I hoped to never find myself in. I could see what happened
              and try and learn from the situation.”
                    I find this theme again and again with successful professionals:
              much of their success comes from the accelerated learning curve af-
              forded by being in the right settings. Trevor’s experience suggests that
              it’s not necessary to be employed by a trading firm to find that environ-
              ment. Just being around experienced peer professionals can multiply
              learning experience.


              If you want to experience yourself as successful, place yourself
              in settings and situations where you can interact with successful
              people.


              Self-Awareness
              Trevor emphasizes the importance of knowing yourself as a trader.
              “For me,” he explains, “when I entered into trading in 1998 after grad-
              uating from college everyone was telling me pit trading was what I
              needed to do. I had always been much more of an introvert and very
              proficient on the computer.” He quickly found pit trading not to his
              liking and became involved in the emerging electronic Globex trading
              platform. He also recognized that his trading style was naturally risk-
              averse and stayed within his comfort zone. “My personality was much
              more oriented to taking frequent trades and keeping my losses under
              control,” Trevor recalls. “This worked very well for me because very
              rarely would I have a day that would get away from me.” We hear many
              generalizations about the best or right way to trade. Trevor’s insight
              was that his trading had to fit who he was. His success came from
              sticking to his basic strengths and interests.

              Discipline
              “This makes or breaks traders from what I saw,” Trevor points out.
              “When you are trading your own money with no risk manager breath-
              ing down your neck, you better have discipline. Without it, it will be
              just a matter of time before you blow up and are unable to recover.”
              Indeed, this discipline is what makes the learning curve possible. “I
              was often early on many trades because I lacked the patience to let

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          273


              the trade play out,” Trevor explains. “Fortunately I had the discipline
              to work my way out of the trade and try over.” This is an excellent
              point: discipline doesn’t mean not making mistakes; it means mak-
              ing mistakes the right way. Particularly when you’re building your
              competence and confidence, it’s important to learn how to “work your
              way out of the trade.” Positive experience can build optimism, but it’s
              the ability to work out of difficult situations that yields the confidence
              that you can handle most anything the market can throw your way.


              First and foremost, good traders are good risk managers.


              Michael described his three most valuable steps in self-coaching as: 1)
          keeping a detailed trading journal; 2) becoming an amateur trading psy-
          chologist; and 3) listening to trading affirmations. This reflects a balance
          that I see among many experienced, successful traders: always working on
          their trading, and always working on themselves.

              Keeping a Journal
              “The thing that’s helped my development the most,” Michael explains,
              “is keeping a proper, detailed trading journal. I’ve always prided myself
              on my ability to remember and learn things solely by memory. Writing
              things down just seemed like unnecessary work . . . That all changed a
              few years ago when I hit a rough spot and decided to reassess things.
              I went back to basics and did things according to the advice of what
              I’d read in all those books over the years—mainly create a detailed
              business plan and keep a journal. In just a few weeks of keeping a de-
              tailed journal, a few self-defeating behaviors jumped out at me. I was
              amazed at how those behaviors never registered with me previously.
              For example, I discovered that I had a bad habit of adjusting my initial
              stop-losses too soon. That often resulted in stopping myself out of win-
              ning trades at breakeven. Fixing that one thing has added considerably
              to my bottom line.”
                   I have experienced the same thing: in keeping records of my trad-
              ing, I learn things about my performance that I had never recognized
              earlier. Often, it’s just a few tweaks to what you’re doing that makes
              the difference between breakeven and profit.


              The advice you see repeated in one trading book after another is
              often the best advice, because it’s the result of years of experience.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          274                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Becoming an Amateur Trading Psychologist
              “I had picked up bits and pieces about trading psychology over time,”
              Michael notes, “but it wasn’t until I read a book dedicated to the topic
              that things really jelled for me. The book I read was Trading in the
              Zone by Mark Douglas. The book crystallized all those bits and pieces
              I’d picked up, as well as forced me to take a look at my own beliefs and
              behaviors. It’s one of those books in which I get something different
              each time I read it. Long before I read Trading in the Zone, I knew
              logically that trading was nothing but a game of probabilities. I knew all
              about expectancy and that I could still make money, even if I had more
              losing trades than winning trades. Yet there was a disconnect between
              my knowledge and my actions while actually trading. The book made
              it very clear to me that I needed to accept that I won’t know, nor do
              I need to know, how any given trade is going to turn out. It made me
              realize that, as long as I stuck to my business/trading plan and kept
              taking good setups, I would make money over time.”


              When we become our own psychologists, we bridge the gap be-
              tween what we know and what we feel.


              Listening to Trading Affirmations
              “A few years ago, I purchased a CD called Trader Affirmation from the
              Day Trading Course site (www.DayTradingCourse.com/cd/),” Michael
              recalls. “The CD has about 30 minutes of someone reading a list of
              affirmations to help the trader’s state of mind. I try to listen to the af-
              firmations at least twice a week, usually while I’m showering in the
              morning. The affirmations help me to remember all the things I’ve read
              in the aforementioned book on trading psychology. Listening to them
              has been a great help in keeping my head on straight.” To be honest,
              I’ve never been a big fan of the whole idea of positive thinking and af-
              firmations (I haven’t heard the CD that Michael uses), but I have to say
              that what Michael says makes a great deal of sense. It’s not enough to
              read a book on trading psychology and file away the lessons. Rather,
              you need to repeat those lessons in order for them to sink in. That has
              become a part of Michael’s weekly routine, helping him cement his ef-
              forts at becoming his own psychologist.

               Your assignment for this lesson is to identify and implement one
          weekly routine to help you internalize sound trading practices. This rou-
          tine could be listening to a CD (or even your own self-recorded messages),
          or it could be a structured review of your trading journal with a colleague.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           275

          The idea is to make right thinking and right action a regular part of your
          experience, so that you become your ideals.


                     COACHING CUE

          Check out Michael’s insights into trading journals at http://tradermike.net/
          2005/08/on trading journals/ and http://tradermike.net/2005/08/thoughts
          on day trading/#moving stops. See also Charles Kirk’s insights in this chapter.




          LESSON 84: MENTOR YOURSELF
          FOR SUCCESS

          Brian Shannon is a trader and an educator of traders. His AlphaTrends
          blog (www.alphatrends.blogspot.com) utilizes video to illustrate trading
          patterns each day, a unique resource for developing traders. He has cap-
          tured many of the principles from these videos in his book Technical Anal-
          ysis Using Multiple Timeframes. Brian’s work is a great illustration of
          what I call contextual thinking: placing observed patterns into larger con-
          texts to gauge their meaning and significance. I find that many short-term
          traders run into problems when they become so focused on the patterns
          over the past few minutes that they miss the larger picture of what the
          market is doing from hour to hour, day to day. By gauging patterns within
          larger contexts, we stand a greater chance of aligning ourselves with longer
          timeframe trends.
               Corey Rosenbloom is a full-time trader who chronicles his work in his
          Afraid to Trade blog (www.afraidtotrade.com). What I like most about
          Corey’s work is that he blends an awareness of trading psychology with
          an understanding of the psychology of markets. His site provides a number
          of trading insights, as well as insights into the minds of traders. I grouped
          Brian and Corey for this lesson because both described the ways in which
          they mentor themselves—guide their own learning processes—as part of
          coaching themselves for success.
               Brian’s response to my query about the three things that have been
          most valuable to his self-coaching reflects his trading as well as his teach-
          ing. Let’s take a look.

              Tuning Out Opinions
              Brian stresses that he doesn’t completely ignore what he hears from
              others, but he’s learned to emphasize his own views from what he’s
              learned over the years. “The edge in trading is so small and quite often

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          276                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              elusive that it is imperative to understand market dynamics/structure
              and where my personal edge lies,” he points out. This is very impor-
              tant: As Brian’s videos illustrate, he is extremely open to information
              from the markets, but he filters out opinions. He has learned to rely
              on his own judgment and experience to maintain his advantage in the
              marketplace. This reliance is essential in building and maintaining con-
              fidence. It’s difficult to imagine sustaining the resilience to weather
              drawdowns if you don’t have a basic trust in how you process informa-
              tion and make decisions. It is better to make a mistake with your own
              judgment—and learn from that—than to make a lucky trade based on
              the tips of others.

              Review
              When you view markets and review them day after day, week after
              week, you develop an intimacy with market relationships and trading
              patterns. An internalization of this intimacy is what traders refer to as a
              feel for markets. It is not mystical inspiration; it’s the result of repeated
              exposure to information under proper learning conditions. Brian ex-
              plains, “I review hundreds of stocks using multiple timeframes in an
              attempt to find what I believe to be the lowest risk/highest potential
              trades according to my entry and exit parameters.” This review pro-
              vides him with good trade ideas, but it also feeds a learning curve. Af-
              ter so much review across multiple timeframes, he has learned what a
              good stock looks like. This internalized expertise helps him deploy his
              capital in the most efficient manner possible.


              We learn our patterns—and the patterns of markets— through in-
              tensive review. It is the intensity of the review that enables us to in-
              ternalize those patterns and become sensitive to their occurrence.


              Mental Checklist
              Here I’ll let Brian speak for himself: “This one is somewhat new and
              came about as a result of letting my guard down on a few occasions
              earlier in the year, which resulted in losses which were larger than
              what I would normally take. Each day before the market opens I go
              through a mental checklist of: how do I feel (tired, anxious, excited,
              etc.) to identify any possible weakness before I commit money. I also
              try to visualize how I will react to what I view as either normal or ab-
              normal trading conditions. I am trying to spend more time on the men-
              tal preparation than I have in the past and it seems to be working well

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                         277


              for me.” Time and again, I find that this is what winners do: they
              learn from their losses and adapt. Trading requires an active mindset;
              it’s a bit like patrolling enemy territory, where you have to be on the
              alert for surprises at all times. If you’re not prepared—and haven’t re-
              hearsed that preparation—you won’t be able to act on instinct when
              those surprises hit. Brian let down his guard, and he was surprised. He
              created a mental checklist and incorporated visualizations of what-if
              scenarios and sharpened his active focus, anticipated what could go
              wrong, and enhanced his results.

              Corey’s three best practices for self-coaching were: 1) find a trading
          partner/group; 2) think in terms of concepts; and 3) keep an idealized trade
          notebook. All three practices reflect the progression of his learning as a
          trader.

              Find a Trading Partner/Group
              “The first thing I learned when I began trading full-time,” Corey re-
              counts, “was that trading could be an extremely lonely, isolating ex-
              perience. It can be difficult to sustain motivation when you’re the only
              one who knows what you’re doing, and friends and family may not un-
              derstand what trading is all about. Trading can be quite difficult, and
              it is immensely helpful to have at least a handful of solid friends or
              colleagues who understand your strengths and weaknesses while sup-
              porting one another for mutual benefit, such that the whole is greater
              than its parts. I began writing the blog initially as a way to reach out
              to others who had similar experiences . . . That has made an ultimate
              difference in my trading, mostly from the interactions and idea-sharing
              with others, which has broadened my awareness . . . I also have one
              experienced trader locally with whom I meet almost every evening to
              discuss the day’s events and share ideas and study markets. This in-
              teraction has challenged us both, and we bring a combination of skills
              that benefit us academically (combined research), emotionally (moti-
              vation), and financially (improved trading tactics).”


              Form a team to make trading personally rewarding and stimulate
              ongoing learning.


              Think in Terms of Concepts
              “I think the largest shift in my performance came when I began
              to view markets and price behavior conceptually, rather than being

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          278                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              driven by indicators or news reports,” Corey explains. “This was a
              process that took time and was difficult for me. Previously, I viewed
              multiple indicators and believed those were the secret to trading suc-
              cess. However, too much conflicting information was not only frus-
              trating, but unprofitable. Even when I decreased the number of in-
              dicators, I still struggled to find profitability. My results were often
              no better than random entries, which was endlessly disappointing.
              The shift came when I was able to view markets and price behav-
              ior conceptually . . . The shift happened slowly and was attributable in
              part to studying Market Profile information, such as the concepts of
              trend day, bracketing markets, auction dynamics, timeframe partici-
              pation, etc. Other concepts were based in the teachings of the early
              founders of technical analysis, including momentum, price range (ex-
              pansion/contraction), broader trend structure, dynamics of price be-
              havior, and price patterns (with their underlying reasons: accumula-
              tion or distribution, reversal or continuation). Essentially the shift was
              one towards greater understanding of price behavior and participation
              by all sorts of market participants . . . To further the conceptualization
              switch, I also began researching the broader concepts of intermarket
              analysis, which compares markets to each other, and sector rotation,
              which details performance of equity sectors and expectations . . . I be-
              gan to see markets as a grand chess game, which opened up a new
              method of perception. Markets clearly do not trade in isolation.”

              When you think in concepts, you understand why markets move,
              and that helps you formulate promising trade ideas.


              Keeping an Idealized Trade Notebook
              Corey explains, “In addition to keeping a simple spreadsheet that
              tracks trading performance (which is essential in knowing when you’re
              making mistakes and correcting them), I use a different kind of trad-
              ing journal that I call my idealized trade notebook. In this notebook, I
              print off the intraday chart (I use the five-minute chart most frequently)
              of the stock or index I traded for the day. Also, if there are particular
              charts I find interesting, I annotate by hand what I deem to be ideal (or
              best) trades based on my understanding of price behavior and oppor-
              tunity. Through looking at the charts at the end of the day without the
              pressure of real-time trading, I am able to see new patterns that I had
              missed . . . I then overlay my fills to see how close I came to achieving
              the total potential move . . . This serves a dual purpose of deeper visu-
              alization of my performance, but more importantly, helps clarify the

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          279

              distinct patterns and trade setups I use for trade entry, management,
              and exit.”


              By tracking ideal trades, we internalize best practices.


               Following Brian and Corey, your task for this lesson is to structure
          your process of review. One task should include a review of the market
          day, comparing your trades to the actual moves in the market, so that you
          are learning both about you and about the patterns you want to be trading.
          Mentoring yourself is not an occasional activity to be performed during
          losing periods. Rather, among the best traders, it is a regular process em-
          bedded into each trading day. Compare what you did with what you could
          have done as a great way to track your progress and bring yourself closer
          to your ideals.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you coordinate your learning with a trading partner, compare your ideas
          of the best setups for the markets you are trading. If you see markets through
          the eyes of others, you can enrich your own pattern recognition.




          LESSON 85: KEEP DETAILED RECORDS

          Two of the respondents to my question—two whose work I’ve followed for
          years now—independently arrived at similar answers. This is not because
          they trade similarly. Instead, it’s a reflection of the wisdom they’ve accu-
          mulated over years of tackling markets and honing their own performance.
               Charles Kirk is a trader, portfolio manager, and author of The Kirk
          Report blog site (www.thekirkreport.com). He also maintains a portion of
          his site for members, who are treated to his stock picking tools and selec-
          tions. Much writing focuses on when to trade; Charles’s forte is selecting
          what to trade. His blog is among the few on the Web that comprehensively
          links to articles on key themes that deal with markets and the economy.
          This is a particularly valuable resource for those who want to stay on top
          of the market’s larger picture. If you want to see how institutional money
          might move markets, it makes sense to focus on the themes tracked by in-
          stitutional money managers. Charles seems to have a knack for identifying
          those themes.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          280                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Jason Goepfert is the editor of the Sentimentrader site (www.senti-
          mentrader.com), which—as its name suggests—focuses on measures of
          market sentiment. Jason freely offers his perspectives on markets and also
          shares the results of his tests of historical market patterns. He collects a
          large amount of data on markets and assembles the data in unique ways to
          uncover possible edges. These data provide information to guide traders’
          thinking, as well as food for specific trade ideas. A particularly interest-
          ing facet of his service is the tracking of relative smart and dumb money,
          including unique ways of reading options sentiment.
               In response to my question of what has most helped his self-mentoring,
          Charles Kirk provided a single, detailed response: his BOO book. BOO
          stands for Book of Observations, and it is a collection of his trading expe-
          rience. “In this book,” he explains, “I keep a detailed track record for every
          trade I’ve made, along with observations about the market and things I’ve
          learned from others and from monitoring my own success and failures ...
          My BOO book contains specific and detailed information on every strategy
          and screen(s) I use, along with detailed performance information over dif-
          ferent periods of time. In essence, everything I’ve learned up until now can
          be found in this book.” Significantly, the contents of the book are organized
          in a database called do-Organizer (www.gemx.com), which enables him to
          readily access any idea that he’s written about.


              A database turns a trading journal into an active research tool.


               Charles indicates that the database keeps his thoughts organized, as
          a scientist might systematically record data and observations from labora-
          tory investigations. “Treating the market, and a strategy, from a scientific,
          evidence-based approach in this manner was helpful to me to keep me fo-
          cused, disciplined, and on the right track,” he explains. “This also helped
          me to test new strategies and to recognize early when certain strategies
          stopped working in specific market conditions, so I could adjust and tran-
          sition my trading as needed.” He also uses the BOO book to track new
          strategy ideas that he wants to integrate into his own trading. “I consider
          myself a perpetual student of the market and maintaining and using my
          BOO book has been incredibly helpful in this regard,” he notes.
               Indeed, Charles explains, “Looking back, the biggest mistake of my
          trading career was not starting my BOO book sooner. It took me several
          years to understand the importance of keeping notes in an organized man-
          ner while using a scientific, evidence-based approach to test and improve
          my skills and strategies.”
               The BOO book is a great example of the creative strategies that
          successful traders utilize to identify and hone their strengths. I believe

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          281


          Charles’s key insight is that the ideas in his book must be organized to
          be maximally useful. By placing his journal in a database format, he is able,
          with a few keystrokes, to access relevant experience from a broad time pe-
          riod. Journals can become unwieldy over time, and it is difficult to pull ma-
          terial from past entries. Increasing his access to his experience has enabled
          Charles to keep the past relevant to the present as a source of learning.
               When I asked Jason Goepfert to share his three greatest sources of
          self-coaching, he started with an idea similar to Charles Kirk’s.

              Write Down Every Idea
              “I’ve written close to 5,000 comments publicly over the past six years,”
              Jason explains, “and also keep a personal journal that tracks more soft
              subjects such as how I’m feeling, anecdotal evidence, clips of headlines
              on news sites, etc. I review all of these periodically and find that they
              are exceptional tools in several respects. They keep me honest (not
              getting too ahead of myself when trading well and not too down when
              not), and they also serve as a check for when I’m anxious about a trade.
              I’ve looked at how I felt right before putting on past winning trades
              and saw that I was anxious then, too, so what I’m feeling now isn’t
              necessarily some sixth sense subconsciously hinting that I not put on
              a trade.”

              Talking to More Accomplished and Experienced Traders
              Jason notes that he meets many successful traders through his mar-
              ket service. “I am always struck that most of them suffer through the
              same travails as the rest of us,” he points out. “They all get emotional
              at times, but they never let that seep into their risk control discipline.
              And that discipline is constant—there is no deviation from the strict
              principle that no one trade will sink them or their career. That is some-
              thing I have written down in front of me. Risk control is paramount,
              and it is something I use as a mantra.


              It’s okay to be emotional; it’s not okay to let emotions change your
              management of risk.


              Always Learning New Things
              “It’s a cliché,” Jason acknowledges, “but I’ve found that the more I
              learn, the more I discover how little I know. That helps tremendously
              in trading, as it has helped me to find new ways to approach old prob-
              lems. Market dynamics are always changing, so we need to find ways

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          282                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              to adjust as conditions change. Learning new trading strategies or new
              ways to test old ones can be very fruitful. It’s a lot of work, but anyone
              afraid of hard work shouldn’t be risking his or her capital. It isn’t just
              trading-related stuff, either. I try to push myself into uncomfortable
              situations and experience new places, new people. That helps broaden
              my perspectives so I don’t get closed-minded to new approaches.”

               What most struck me about Jason’s insights was that writing thoughts
          down led to self-discovery. When he tracked his trades and emotions, he
          found that he was often nervous prior to winning trades. This tracking
          helped him not succumb to nerves when putting on a trade. It is this con-
          stant desire to learn new things—about self and market—that keeps trad-
          ing challenging and interesting as a career. Tracking also helps the trader
          adapt to shifting market conditions. Jason Goepfert and Charles Kirk are
          not afraid of the hard work: they spend a great deal of time developing, re-
          viewing, and testing their strategies. There is nothing get rich quick about
          their approaches to markets. Their record keeping is their way of sustain-
          ing a learning curve.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to create an indexing system for
          your own trading journal, so that you can track themes associated with
          what you’re doing and how well you’re doing it. Tracking means catego-
          rizing your trades by strategy/setup, by markets, by results, and by your
          specific market and personal observations. Keep a journal in electronic
          form, such as through the StockTickr service (www.stocktickr.com), as
          one way of indexing your ideas. Another method is to turn your journal
          into a trading blog, with tags for various topics. Still another approach is to
          maintain your journal in a formal database, like Charles Kirk. Your records
          need to be living, breathing entities that you can frequently review for
          insight and perspective. Imagine your trades organized by market, market
          condition, trade setup, time of day, and size, so that you can pull up your
          results for any given market situation. Organized in this manner, your ex-
          perience may just become your greatest trading coach—as it has been for
          Charles and Jason.


                     COACHING CUE

          Consider a portion of your journal devoted solely to research: developing and
          tracking new trade ideas. Charles and Jason continuously search and research
          for trade ideas as market conditions change. What is working in the current
          market environment? Which stocks are moving? Which patterns are showing up?
          Journal about the markets as well as about your trading to help you anticipate
          opportunity.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          283


          LESSON 86: LEARN TO BE FALLIBLE

          Dave Mabe is a trader, system developer, and founder of the StockTickr
          service and site (www.stocktickr.com). StockTickr is a unique resource
          because it enables traders to track their ideas and performance in an on-
          line format that can be shared with selected groups of traders. This Web
          2.0 approach to developing ideas and tracking progress enables traders
          to build their own community of like-minded peers. The StockTickr site
          also includes an informative blog featuring interviews with traders who
          share their work online. I particularly like how StockTickr has created
          a true online trading journal, making journaling a social activity. It gives
          traders control over what they share and with whom. Indeed, there is
          huge potential simply in the idea of sharing a real-time journal with a
          trading coach.
               Chris Perruna is a full-time trader and blogger whose work can be
          found on the site that bears his name (www.chrisperruna.com). His site
          is devoted to “successful investing through education” and covers topics
          ranging from screening for fundamentals among stocks to position siz-
          ing and charting. He shares his stock screens with readers, along with
          specific trade ideas. I like how the site enables traders to learn from his
          example.
               Let’s take a look at how these two pros responded to my question about
          what has been most helpful to their self-coaching, starting with Dave.

              Trading Journal
              Dave asserts, “A trading journal is by far more powerful than any in-
              dicator or platform. It provides the foundation for everything I do as
              a trader. Your mind can play tricks on you, but your execution data
              don’t lie. Being able to reflect upon my trading results allows me to
              step back and view results in aggregate to see how I’m measuring up
              to my goals.” I’ve seen this with many successful traders: the journal
              offers a layer of accountability and focus that would otherwise be miss-
              ing. Dave also stresses the importance of flexibility in goal setting via
              journals. “Instead of setting a single goal (for example, a certain dollar
              amount over a time period), I find it much better to set a range of goals
              from conservative to radical. A lot of traders will set high goals, which
              set them up for devastation when they aren’t achieved.”


              We often focus on what we want to see. Statistics on our trading
              patterns don’t lie; they focus us on what we need to see.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          284                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Learning to Be Wrong
              “Most beginning traders have a tremendous need to be right and are
              resistant to admitting they might be wrong,” Dave observes. “I learned
              quickly that being right (that is, having a high win rate) doesn’t cor-
              relate well with making money. Win rate is overrated—in fact, one of
              the most profitable strategies I’ve traded had a winning percentage be-
              low 30 percent.” Dave is right: most good traders I’ve worked with are
              not far from a win rate of 50 percent. Their success comes from know-
              ing when they’re right—and taking full advantage—and knowing when
              they’re wrong—and minimizing losses. Overcoming the psychological
              need to be right is essential to success; without that, it’s too easy to
              take profits early and remain stubborn in losing trades.

              Automate
              Dave recounts, “I’ve spent my trading career trying to remove as much
              of my discretion as possible from my trading. Many aspects of manual
              trading systems can be automated. The benefits of automation are nu-
              merous: more consistency, less time spent doing trading grunt work,
              and fewer mistakes. I’ve found that the more automation I have in my
              systems, the better my results. This includes my manual trading sys-
              tems all the way to 100 percent completely automated trading systems
              that I trade.” His point is well taken: even with discretionary trading,
              execution can be automated so that decisions can remain strictly rule-
              governed. The simple step of trading with limit orders rather than at the
              market can make a meaningful difference in performance over time, as
              traders enter and exit trades at favorable levels, rather than chase mar-
              kets and get themselves in and out at the worst possible times.

              Chris Perruna’s responses will ring true to traders who have traversed
          their initial learning curves; he focuses on some of the universals of suc-
          cessful trading:

              Understand Me
              “The most powerful tool I have found in life and in this specific case,
              the market,” Chris explains, “is what I, as a person, am capable of do-
              ing. I finally understand that personal characteristics that are ingrained
              in my DNA will only allow me to trade successfully under specific cir-
              cumstances. For example, I am much more consistent and profitable as
              a medium-term and longer-term trend trader than as a day trader (even
              more so on the long side). I don’t need to be everything all the time
              as long as I continue to focus on the areas that bring me the greatest

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                             285

              success. Understanding me has been my holy grail of understanding
              how to trade the market with consistency and profitability.” Chris’s in-
              sight is critically important: you don’t make yourself fit a market or
              trading style; you find the markets and styles that best fit you. Suc-
              cessful traders trade within themselves: they stick to what they do best
              and ignore the rest.


              Find what you do best and fashion trading strategies around that.


              Learning to Cut Losses
              “It’s almost cliché,” Chris points out, “but not many people can do it in
              any aspect of life. I have learned to cut losses in my trading, my career,
              my hobby of competitive poker, and everywhere else in life where the
              rule applies. Without this rule, there wouldn’t be a third rule.” Chris
              makes a valuable point: you can’t live one way and trade another.
              It’s hard to imagine being totally disciplined in trading and lax in other
              areas of life. Good trading practice is a philosophy of living: pursuing
              opportunity, managing risk, limiting losses, and diversifying positions.
              Chris trades the way he lives.

              Study and Work Hard
              It is difficult to find a successful trader who does not place hard work
              at the center of what she does. “It is extremely important to my success
              for me to continuously study the markets on a fundamental and tech-
              nical level and learn from my successes and mistakes,” Chris points
              out. “Applying the knowledge gained from past experience allows me
              to properly analyze similar situations in the future with slightly greater
              odds of success. Never stop learning is a phrase I will never stop say-
              ing, as it proves to be truer as I get older.”

               Notice how both Dave and Chris emphasize the importance of know-
          ing when they’re wrong. This is an important difference between begin-
          ning traders and experienced ones. The beginners focus on being right, as
          Chris pointed out. Beginners try to avoid being wrong. The experienced
          traders know they’ll be wrong on a significant proportion of their trades
          and fully accept that. Their self-coaching is designed to help them antici-
          pate and manage losses, not avoid them. They have a plan for each trade
          to deal with loss, and they have an overall trading plan to deal with periods
          of drawdown. Your assignment for this lesson is to use your trading jour-
          nal to flag your fallibility, identifying the five largest losing days in the past

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          286                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          year. What did you do wrong on those days; what could you have done dif-
          ferently? What were the problems that occurred on more than one of these
          losing occasions? The idea is to embrace your fallibility by turning it into
          an engine of learning. If you clearly identify the mistakes from your worst
          trading days, you’ll be better prepared to avoid them in the future. Your
          worst trades can be your best tool for self-understanding—and your best
          guide for self-coaching.


                      COACHING CUE

          As you review your trading, make a special study of how you exit trades. Do you
          tend to exit too early, so that you leave potential proﬁts on the table? Do you
          tend to overstay your welcome, so that potential proﬁts are retraced? Take it a
          step further: what could you have looked at to stay in the trade longer or to exit
          sooner? How can you best adjust your exits to the market’s level of volatility?
          If you reﬁne your exits, you can break your trading down into components and
          turn observations into goals for improvement.




          LESSON 87: THE POWER OF RESEARCH

          Rob Hanna is a trader and the writer of the Quantifiable Edges blog
          (www.quantifiableedges.blogspot.com), a unique site that tracks historical
          patterns in the stock market. His electronic newsletter goes out daily, de-
          tailing the trades he places from his research. For traders, the blog and
          newsletter are unique tools that can extend their market edge. I particu-
          larly find historical patterns relevant to discretionary trading, as we’ll see
          in Chapter 10. With a sound understanding of historical performance, we
          are in a great position to identify markets that are following their usual pat-
          terns and those that are not. Both scenarios can generate excellent trade
          ideas.
               Jeff Miller is a money manager in Naperville, Illinois, who also shares
          his ideas about markets and trading through his blog, A Dash of Insight
          (http://oldprof.typepad.com). He frequently challenges accepted trading
          wisdom and offers perspectives on markets that reflect his disciplined anal-
          ysis and understanding of economics. He has researched trading systems
          and uses those systems in his portfolio management. Like Rob, Jeff’s edge
          is that he tests ideas before he trades them, giving him confidence in risking
          his capital.
               Rob’s answer to my question of what he’s found most helpful to
          his self-mentoring as a trader was quite simple: “Research, research, and

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           287


          research.” He explains, “I know that sounds like one answer repeated three
          times, but it’s not. It’s the top three answers . . . I’ve been through several
          stages in my career and traded using different methodologies. The one con-
          stant I’ve found with any method of trading I’ve employed is that it takes
          a substantial amount of research outside of market hours to successfully
          implement them.”
               Rob Hanna started his career day trading, focusing on short-term se-
          tups, such as those described in Jeff Cooper’s Hit and Run books. What
          Rob found most useful was not the setup patterns, but the screening for
          volatile, trending stocks to implement the strategies. He began creating
          his own scans based on trading patterns, focusing on trades with the best
          risk/reward. “I wrote down each potential trade in a notebook along with
          the trigger price for the next trading day,” Rob described. “When the trade
          was done, I would log the results in my accounting software. I kept a field
          in the accounting database called reason. It was there I entered the name
          of the setup I used to initiate the trade.” This is a theme we see time and
          again with successful traders: they track their results meticulously to aid
          their learning curves.


              Keeping records of trades that work cements success patterns in
              your mind.

               Rob Hanna points out that keeping his trades in a database accom-
          plished two goals: it forced him to have a reason for every trade, and it
          enabled him to track his results as a function of the trade setups employed.
          “It made it extremely easy for me to determine which setups worked best
          and which ones struggled,” he explains. “By doing this, I knew which setups
          I should continue to focus on and which ones I should scrap altogether.”
          When Rob didn’t have a solid reason for a trade, he simply entered the
          word Hunch as the reason for the trade. “It didn’t take long for me to fig-
          ure out how much the Hunch trades were costing,” he recounts. He quickly
          scrapped trading from hunch alone.
               The second phase of Rob’s research occurred when he switched to
          longer-term trading that utilized patterns inspired by William O’Neil’s
          CANSLIM approach. Rob began to utilize technical screens with the
          TC2000 software from Worden Bros., with his final lists filtered through
          fundamental criteria. “With TC2000,” he describes, “I am able to easily
          place notes on the chart. This is incredibly useful. If a stock pops up with
          an interesting pattern, I may have already researched that stock in recent
          weeks. With the note feature, I can see if I already checked the funda-
          mentals and rejected it for some reason. No need to waste time looking
          up the same symbol over and over.” As with the day-trading patterns, the

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          288                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          setups were less important than the work that went into implementing
          them. “Once again,” he notes, “I found it was the research and not the trad-
          ing that made me the money.”
               In Rob’s third phase of research, he has formally back-tested his trad-
          ing ideas, using Excel and TradeStation as primary tools. This back-testing
          has enabled him to generate actionable trade ideas. As he puts it, “I love
          taking these trades because I have a good idea of my success rate and
          profitability expectation going in.” Reviewing a variety of price, breadth,
          volume, sentiment, and other indicator data helps him develop a view on
          markets, but it also “helps me to unveil what is truth and what is lore with
          regards to conventional market wisdom. There is so much information out
          there. It’s difficult to know what’s valuable and what information is sim-
          ply hype . . . There is great value in being able to test ideas and understand
          what indicators and setups actually provide a quantifiable edge, and what
          ones don’t.”


              Much conventional trading wisdom does not stand the scrutiny of
              objective analysis.


               For Rob, research has been his source of edge. “Whether my focus
          has been day trading, intermediate-term momentum trading, or quantita-
          tive swing trading,” he explains, “I have consistently found that it’s been
          the nightly research that has facilitated my growth as a trader more than
          anything . . . The ideas are all constructed at night. Market hours are sim-
          ply used for executing those ideas. Research (stock screening and chart-
          ing), research (quantitative analysis), and research (results analysis) are
          the three things I’ve found most helpful in coaching myself as a trader.”
               What I most like about Rob’s perspective is that it highlights the rel-
          evance of research for every kind of trader, not just those that trade me-
          chanical systems. Rob has tested and traded setups, but he also has treated
          himself—and his trading—as a subject for study. When Rob identified the
          ideas that work best for him, he has been able to maximize opportunity and
          eliminate the hunches and market lore that cost him money.
               Jeff Miller approaches markets differently from Rob, but his per-
          spectives on self-mentoring are surprisingly similar. “The most impor-
          tant thing—by far—in my trading is having a system and/or method,” he
          stresses. “Without a system in which you have confidence, you are adrift.
          You second-guess yourself on every occasion. This leads to selling winners
          too soon, holding on to losers too long, and many other errors. You need to
          know that your basic method works. If you really understand and believe
          this, you can focus on making the correct decisions, which may not always
          be the winning decisions.”

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           289


               The key word Jeff uses is know. Many traders don’t know their edge;
          they don’t know how well their methods work in different market condi-
          tions. They have beliefs, but not deeply held convictions about the ways in
          which they make decisions. As a result, traders lose discipline. This loss is
          not because they cannot follow rules. It’s because they don’t deeply believe
          in the rules to begin with.


              Many times, poor discipline is the result of shallow conviction. If
              we don’t truly know our edge, how can we believe in it?


               A second important element for Jeff Miller’s self-coaching is analysis
          and review. “Having a system means testing it properly,” he explains. “This
          is not back-fitting for a short time period. It is developing the method in one
          era and testing over out-of-sample data covering different markets. Only
          then can you be confident. Even with this method, you must do regular
          performance reviews to make sure that something in the world has not
          changed. There may be a tough decision about whether you are in a pre-
          dictable slack period or circumstances that are really different.” In other
          words, trading is fraught with uncertainty; even the best ideas have a lim-
          ited shelf life. The purpose of analysis and review is to generate an edge,
          but also to monitor changes in that edge over time. It’s not as simple as
          finding systems that make money for all time and all markets.
               Jeff’s third area of self-coaching is learning to recognize exceptions.
          “Understanding your method means knowing when something truly excep-
          tional is happening,” he points out. “We all know the danger in saying that,
          ‘This time is different.’ Keeping this in mind, there are exceptional trading
          opportunities lasting a day or a week, even for those of us with longer time
          horizons.” This thought gets us back to the excellent point raised by Henry
          Carstens: knowing when to turn your trading off. When markets are be-
          having in historically abnormal ways, the usual methods may not produce
          their usual results. Exceptional markets yield exceptional risks as well as
          rewards.
               The takeaway from Rob and Jeff is the value of self-knowledge. The
          more you know about your trading methods, the more you can play to
          their strengths and avoid their weaknesses. Note that for both Rob and
          Jeff, this has meant considerable time and effort outside of trading hours
          to hone their edges and stay on top of how they change. I consistently find
          that a major predictor of trading success is the amount of time devoted to
          markets outside of trading hours proper. The time spent in defining and
          refining trading methods is a major part of this commitment. When you are
          your own trading coach, you are no different from a basketball or football

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          290                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          coach: much of your success will come from the hours you put into recruit-
          ing new talent, practicing, and planning.
                Your assignment for this lesson is to treat yourself as a trading sys-
          tem, so that you can research, research, research your performance over
          various markets and market conditions. For this assignment, pay particu-
          lar attention to the kinds of trades that make you most of your money. Do
          they occur at particular times of day, or in particular market conditions?
          Do they occur primarily in a few markets or stock names? Are they primar-
          ily short-term trades or longer-term ones? Are they mostly reversal trade,
          or are they trend following? Your goal is to clearly identify your bread and
          butter as a trader, so that you can allocate most of your risk to what you
          do best and reduce the risk associated with trades that are outside your
          wheelhouse. Understand what you do—especially what you do best—as
          it is the most effective means for developing and sustaining confidence in
          your work. Weekly and monthly reviews of each of your trades by cate-
          gories are a great start in this direction.


                     COACHING CUE

          Track the number of trades you place that break even or that make or lose only
          a small amount of money. Many times, this is a sign of good discipline in cutting
          losers (although it can also reveal problems with exiting winning trades far too
          early). Recognize quickly when a trade is wrong to help keep the average size of
          losing trades below that of winners, an essential ingredient of trading success.




          LESSON 88: ATTITUDES AND GOALS,
          THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF SUCCESS

          Ray Barros wears many hats as a money manager, trader, blog writer, book
          author, and trading coach. He is one of the very few coaches that I know
          who incorporates a keen awareness of psychology with a sound under-
          standing of markets. His Trading Success blog (www.tradingsuccess.com/
          blog) is notable for trading and psychological insights, and his book The
          Nature of Trends is an excellent tool for mentorship. It explains his ways
          of analyzing markets, his risk/money management ideas, and his trading
          psychology tools.
              John Forman similarly combines a wealth of roles. An athletic coach,
          he also mentors traders and offers his insights in The Essentials of
          Trading blog (www.theessentialsoftrading.com/Blog). His book by that
          same name is an excellent introduction and orientation to markets, with

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                          291

          valuable views on analyzing markets, executing trades, and developing
          trading systems. He is keenly aware of the importance of skill development
          and psychology to the evolution of traders.
               When I asked Ray for the three things that have most contributed to his
          self-coaching, his number one factor was attitudes. Among the attitudes he
          views as essential to trading success are:

              Honesty
              Ray defines this as “the value of never consciously faking reality. If
              there is one trait that has proven critical to my success and to the suc-
              cess of my students, it has been this one. Successful students are bru-
              tally honest with themselves. Failed students tend to provide excuses
              and rationalizations for their failures.”

              Responsibility
              “I learned to take full responsibility for my successes and failures,” Ray
              explains. “With successes, my question is: How can I repeat this? With
              failures, my question is: What can I learn from this?”

              Tenacity
              “I’ll do whatever is necessary to achieve my goals,” Ray emphasizes.
              “This includes constant learning by first learning the material, then
              adapting it to suit my needs. I notice that failed students tend to re-
              sist the material whenever that leads outside their comfort zones.”


              Learning requires a willingness to venture outside one’s comfort
              zone to see and do things in new ways.


              Discipline
              Ray stresses, “I am disciplined enough to write out my trading rules
              and execute the rules consistently. I am disciplined enough to keep my
              psychological and equity journals so that I can learn from my trades.
              And I am disciplined enough to celebrate my successes and take time
              from the markets to recharge.”

              Citing Linda Bradford Raschke, who has mentored many traders over
          the years through her online trading room, seminars, and books, Ray
          Barros stresses that coaching is only valuable if its insights are imple-
          mented by traders in their 3-Rs: routines, research, and reviews.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 30, 2008    13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          292                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              Among the routines that Ray finds essential to his lifestyle as a
          trader are:

            r Updating data and journals.
            r Reviewing trades.
            r Preparing for the coming day, “including visualization of entries and
              exits.”
            r Balancing other duties and responsibilities with trading regimes.
            r Staying on top of personal and business finances.
            r Completing commitments, including writing articles, preparing for
              talks, and so on.

               He notes that his self-mentoring blends review and research. “I may
          notice a pattern in my journals that needs attention,” he explains. “It may
          be that I am suffering losses or experiencing profits beyond the norm. In
          the former case, I would need to research the context that is leading to the
          loss. I’d need to determine whether it is incompatibility between my plan
          and current market conditions, or whether I am breaching discipline. In
          either case, I have to decide what to do. If current market conditions do not
          suit my plan, I’ll cut down size or take a break. If I am breaching discipline,
          I identify the context/contexts within which the breach/breaches occur and
          take remedial actions. I then review the actions to see if they have had the
          desired results. If not, I change the actions.”
               Ray also carefully reviews and researches periods of unusually positive
          trading performance. “If I am making above normal profits, I determine if
          current market conditions happen to suit my plan or if there has been a
          fundamental shift that is leading to greater profitability. In the former case,
          I increase my size and ensure that I maintain my discipline before I take a
          trade. I have learned that, in my case, I need to be more vigilant when I am
          having a great run than when I am suffering a drawdown. If there has been
          a fundamental shift, I seek to identify what I have done to cause the shift,
          and I seek consciously to continue the new behavior.”

              Vigilance during a run of profitability is an effective way to prevent
              overconfidence and lapses of discipline.

              “I also constantly research new ideas,” Ray Barros notes. He is an avid
          reader and seeks insights that will impact his life and trading. When he
          encounters a new trading idea, he outsources the testing of the idea to
          determine whether or not it truly possesses an edge. “My review provides a
          solid foundation for my activities,” he explains. “I set goals, take action, and
          then see if the action is leading toward or away from the desired outcome.”

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           293


              One of Ray’s best practices is the separation of his daily journals
          into trading and personal components. In his trading journal, he grades
          his entry and exit discipline, giving himself three points if he entered and
          exited according to plan; one point if either the entry or exit broke disci-
          pline; and zero points if he broke discipline on both. “I look to maintain a 90
          percent threshold,” he explains. “I must garner 90 percent of the total pos-
          sible points. If I drop below 90 percent but above 85 percent, I start looking
          for causes, and I start remedial actions. If I drop below 85 percent, I take
          time off from trading.” In the trading journal, he also tracks the excursion
          of each of his trades, expressing how much he took out of the trade as a
          proportion of what he possibly could have made. “I seek to capture around
          65 percent of a possible move,” he elaborates. “If I find that I am consis-
          tently capturing significantly less than 65 percent, I take this as a warning I
          am entering an ebb state.”


              Like successful manufacturing businesses, traders can engage in
              continuous quality improvement by evaluating their processes and
              correcting shortcomings.

               In the personal portion of the journal, Ray notes event, feelings, and
          behaviors that accompany each of his trades. “The aim here,” he points
          out, “is to have enough details so that I can spot the patterns that warn of
          fundamental shifts, breaches of discipline, and ebb-and-flow conditions.”
          In other words, he is tracking his performance much as he tracks a market,
          looking for signs of trends emerging from the data. When he is flowing, he
          wants to be more aggressive in his trading; when his execution is ebbing,
          he wants to cut his risk. Toward this end, he also tracks his trading metrics,
          including his average win and loss sizes; his win and loss rate; the standard
          deviations of profits and losses; consecutive wins and losses; average hold-
          ing periods for winners and losers; his expectancy ratio; his drawdowns;
          and his recovery periods from drawdowns. The key to Ray’s self-coaching
          is to study himself as intensively as he studies markets.
               John Forman echoes Ray’s point about making sure that one’s trad-
          ing life fits into her personal life. “The first thing a trader needs to do,”
          he emphasizes, “is step back and take a big picture view of things. This
          is extremely important for new traders, as they need to figure out how
          trading is going to fit into their lives. Even folks who have been doing it
          for a while need to do this from time to time as well. Trading is part of
          one’s life, not separate from it. What part it plays must necessarily define
          how it is approached, and that can change over time. Periodically taking
          the 30,000-foot view allows one to maintain perspective.” I wholeheartedly
          agree with John’s insight. Even successful professional traders can become

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          294                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          overloaded by work responsibilities, tracking markets and themes day and
          night. If traders allow trading to consume them, they lose concentration
          and efficiency—and eventually that takes a toll on performance. Success-
          ful trading means knowing when to not trade and when to conserve and
          renew personal energy. Often, the best trading decision is the decision to
          take risk off and go on a holiday from markets. This reprieve can spark
          good thinking about markets and performance from the 30,000-foot view,
          aiding performance once trading commences.
               “A second important thing,” John Forman notes of his self-coaching, “is
          the commitment to performance improvement. That may seem to be an ob-
          vious thing, but it’s something easy to stray from at times. It’s often hard to
          not become complacent with one’s trading, especially when a level of suc-
          cess has been achieved. In order for the self-coaching to have any value,
          though, the realization that one can keep getting better, and the desire to
          do so, must be at the fore all the time.” I have noticed this time and again
          among the firms where I work. The best traders and portfolio managers
          seek out coaching when they’re doing well, not just when they’re losing.
          They have a continual drive for self-improvement; not just a temporary de-
          sire to remedy deficiencies.


              The measure of a trader is how hard he works on trading during
              winning periods.


               “Finally,” John concludes, “setting good goals and assessing how one is
          progressing toward them is critical. These are things coaches in other activ-
          ities like athletics do as external observers. The advantage there, however,
          is that they don’t have the direct link to the individual’s psyche, which com-
          plicates self-assessment. The most challenging aspect of this process for
          the individual is not allowing it to adversely impact one’s confidence level.
          That means the process needs to be as objective as possible, and the trader
          needs to be able to disconnect their ego from it.” Forman raises an excel-
          lent point here: goal setting and review must be pursued in a manner
          that does not damage confidence or motivation. Vague or distant goals of-
          fer insufficient feedback and learning; difficult goals can yield frustration.
          Tracking goals with a negative mindset—emphasizing shortfalls—makes
          self-coaching a punitive activity. The good self-coach, like the good athletic
          coach, uses goals to facilitate learning and build confidence. No one will
          sustain a process if, over time, it leads them to feel worse about themselves.
               Your assignment for this lesson is to conduct a self-assessment from
          30,000 feet. We’ve talked about tracking your trading, but now the goal is
          to track your self-coaching. Is trading fitting into your life, or do you find
          yourself fitting your life into the markets? Is most your time consumed

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                            295

          with trading, or are you spending at least equal time in performance
          improvement—the reviews and research of markets and trades—and the
          routines that help you develop new ideas and hone skills? How much of
          your efforts are goal-focused, and how much are you drifting from day to
          day? Do you get down to the hard business of grading your performance
          and tracking your ebbs and flows, and do you use this information to guide
          your risk-taking? In short, if you’re going to be a good self-coach, you have
          to be as aware of your own coaching performance as your trading results.
          The value of such meta-coaching—training yourself to be a better mentor
          of yourself—is a key lesson we can take away from Ray and John.


                      COACHING CUE

          Just as you can develop a report card on your trading to track your progress, you
          can grade your self-coaching eﬀorts by assessing how much time you spend in
          self-coaching mode; how clearly you set goals for yourself; and how well you
          sustain work toward those goals. You can’t develop as a trader without working
          on trading skills, and you can’t develop as your own coach without working on
          your coaching skills.




          LESSON 89: A VIEW FROM THE
          TRADING FIRMS

          Mike Bellafiore is a partner at SMB Capital, a proprietary trading firm in
          New York City that specializes in the short-term trading of individual eq-
          uities. He is also a successful trader and a mentor of traders within the
          firm. Most recently, SMB has extended its training to the trading public
          via a blog (www.smbtraining.com/blog) and a formal trading curriculum.
          I had the pleasure of visiting SMB Capital and was impressed by Mike,
          Steve Spencer, and the others in the firm. There was a good buzz on the
          trading floor throughout the day as traders shared ideas and breaking
          developments.
               Larry Fisher is a co-owner of Trading RM, a proprietary trading firm in
          Chicago that specializes in trading individual stocks and options on those
          stocks (http://tradingrm.com). Larry and his partner Reid Valfer started
          the firm with the desire of providing a mentoring and teaching environ-
          ment for traders. An unusual feature of the firm is that Larry and Reid
          call out all their trades, illustrating to their traders what they’re doing
          throughout the day. Teaching and mentorship are thus woven into the fab-
          ric of daily trading. In visiting Trading RM, I was impressed by the learning

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          296                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          environment. Larry and Reid have developed a web site and blog so
          that they can share their insights with the trading public (http://blog.
          tradingrm.com).
               It is typical of Mike that, when I asked him for the three things that
          most help his self-coaching, he emailed me a 14-page document. He is at-
          tuned to the mentoring process and practices it in his own trading. Number
          one on his list is keeping trading statistics. “Statistics are very important for
          my trading,” Mike explains. “I must know what trading plays are working
          best for me, what stocks I am trading profitably, my win rate, my liquidity
          stats, etc.”
               The head trader at SMB, Gilbert Mendez (GMan) created a tool for
          the desk called the SMB Chop Tracker. It summarizes trading statistics
          each day for each trader, so that they can see how well they’re doing and
          where their profits and losses are coming from. “Most often I struggle with
          my trading because I am in the wrong stocks,” Mike Bellafiore notes. He
          tells the story of how he traded one particular stock, MBI, quite well in the
          fall and then consistently lost money in it. “I felt like someone else was
          inhabiting my trading body,” he jokes. “So I looked at my stats. They were
          screaming, ‘Hey, Mike, maybe another stock for you?’ I figured out some
          adjustments I could make, concluded there were better stocks for me to
          trade, and decided to move on. I went right back to making money.”


              Statistics on our trading alerts us to hidden patterns, both prob-
              lems and solutions.

               Mike also tells about a particularly vicious loss he took in trading
          SNDK. “I will always remember 11/21/05,” he recalls. “What a bloodbath.
          For weeks I walked around cussing SNDK underneath my breath and
          swore to never trade it again. But one day I checked my statistics and sur-
          prisingly learned that I actually traded SNDK well, save that one day. I was
          overvaluing that last rip. While trading, you develop a perception of how
          well you are trading a stock. That perception can be incorrect. When you
          study your trading statistics, you may discover that the stocks you thought
          you were killing, you weren’t. And you may discover that the stocks you
          thought were a disaster weren’t.”
               Mike Bellafiore’s second coaching practice is something we all do, but
          not with intention: breathe. “While trading, it is essential to quiet your mind
          so that you accurately process the data that the market offers,” he ob-
          serves. “Some traders think they just need to focus better and shut out
          unneeded stimuli. These traders believe they can will themselves to focus
          better. But quieting your mind is an acquired skill. Mariano Rivera [a fast-
          ball pitcher] can’t just start throwing a changeup because he really wants

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           297

          to. He would have to spend hundreds of hours working on his grip, motion,
          and control. It takes 15 to 30 minutes of deep breathing a day to develop
          and maintain this skill. My partner and co-founder of SMB Capital, Steve
          Spencer, taught me how to properly breathe. Steve teaches this to our new
          traders on our prop desk. I used to think I accurately processed the data
          that the market offered. But after I learned how to properly breathe, I rec-
          ognized that this was not accurate . . . You must develop the skill of quieting
          your mind so that you accurately process your market data and, as a result,
          fulfill your trading potential.”
               Mike tells the story of a young trader next to him who cheered when-
          ever his stocks moved in his favor. The veteran traders merely smirked;
          that trader soon blew up. “For old-school traders like us,” he points out,
          “there is no celebrating intraday. You are now rooting for your stocks and
          not just interpreting the data that the market is offering.” By controlling his
          breathing, he is better able to let the market data come to him, improving
          his decision-making.


              If you’re celebrating or bemoaning a trade while you’re in it, you’re
              not focused on the market itself.

               Mike Bellafiore’s third self-coaching best practice is watching his trad-
          ing tapes. “Watching my trading tapes has improved my trading more than
          any other self-improvement technique,” he asserts. “Many great athletes
          such as Alex Rodriguez use video to improve their performance. I record
          all my trades and watch back the important plays. Doing so has helped me
          particularly with my two biggest weaknesses: closing out a winning posi-
          tion prematurely, and adding size.” By watching tapes of his trading, Mike
          developed rules for recognizing when he should hold positions, when he
          should get back into a position he has exited, and when he should get out
          of positions. These rules were compiled into lists that became his system.
          “It gave me the confidence to add size when I see a great risk/reward op-
          portunity that is on my list,” he explains. “I learned from my trading tapes
          that adding size in certain spots offered favorable risk/reward trading op-
          portunities, and that perhaps it was even irresponsible to not add size with
          certain trades. So when I spot a trade from my list of When to Add Size, I
          just execute.”
               Once again, self-coaching boils down to directed, hard work. “In my
          trading space,” Mike insists, “if you are not willing to come into the office
          on the weekends and/or find some time after the close to watch your trad-
          ing tapes, then you are not competing as a trader. Trading is a sport. It’s
          a competition. And the results of your trading are often determined by the
          effort you put in before the open.”

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55   Printer: Yet to come




          298                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Larry Fisher’s responses to the question of the three self-coaching
          practices that have most aided his trading reflect his teaching practices at
          his firm, which in turn reflect his years of trading experience. Here’s what
          he has to say:

              Writing a Trading Journal
              “Over the years, I have used a journal as a medium to make sure that I
              am in tune with my emotions,” Larry explains. “The journaling process
              has become a very important part of my trading routine. I have realized
              that writing in my journal pays huge dividends, especially when I am
              trading well and I am trading poorly. The process keeps me grounded,
              while often limiting the duration of trading slumps and extending pe-
              riods of trading successes.” Notice that Larry employs the journal ef-
              fectively both when he’s trading well and when he’s not. This keeps
              him attuned to emotions in a positive way—it grounds him in confi-
              dent trading when he’s seeing markets well—and it enables him to take
              corrective action quickly when he’s not in tune with the stocks he’s
              trading. So often the difference between the successful trader and the
              unsuccessful one is how they handle being very right and very wrong.
              The journal, properly constructed, can be a tool for adjusting to these
              extremes, enabling you to add risk when you’re trading well and pull
              back when you’re not.


              The trading journal is a means for sustaining self-observation.


              Communicating with Peers
              Larry Fisher notes, “I have a network of friends and colleagues with
              whom I make an effort to communicate on a regular basis. This allows
              me to learn from others while sharing real-time market experiences.
              These conversations aid me in dealing with the ebb and flow associated
              with being a professional trader.” This theme arises again and again
              with the best traders: they have a rich network of contacts that help
              them personally and professionally. Larry’s observation echoes what
              we heard from Ray Barros: there is always an ebb and flow to trading;
              profitable times and lean times. Being able to connect with traders who
              have been through the cycles and know how to move beyond them can
              be a tremendous support. We also underestimate the power of social
              interaction as a means of cognition: some of us simply think more
              effectively when we think aloud. Sounding boards for our ideas helps
              us hone our market views and make better decisions.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           299


              Trading in a Good Environment
              “In order for me to be able to coach myself,” Larry explains, “I need
              to trade in an environment that is conducive for success. We built our
              firm with that in mind. All the traders at my firm are on the same page.
              Willingness to be a part of a team combined with the desire to learn
              are characteristics each trader possesses.” I have visited many firms
              in which traders operate in almost total isolation of one another. One
              person’s learning experiences become just that: opportunities to learn
              for that individual alone. When a firm is founded upon a team con-
              cept, everyone’s learning becomes learning for the group. This is Larry
              Fisher’s central insight, and it is the greatest strength of his firm. When
              everyone calls out her trades, there’s no place to hide. That is tremen-
              dously freeing. You can learn from the successes of your peers and
              also from their mistakes. Their ideas spark yours, and your heads-up
              on news or breakouts aids everyone else. In an environment in which
              all traders are their own coaches, all traders inevitably contribute to
              each other’s coaching.


              Learning cannot occur without accountability.


               These are the real words of real traders who really trade for a living
          and really run successful trading firms. Their best practices can become
          your own, even if you don’t work for SMB Capital or Trading RM. How do
          your trading practices compare with those at these firms? How does your
          trading atmosphere compare with theirs? When you’re coaching yourself,
          you are—in a sense—creating your own trading firm. You are coach, risk
          manager, researcher, and trader rolled into one. How well you fulfill these
          roles depends on the time and effort you devote to each. A world-class bas-
          ketball player works on offense and defense; on passing, dribbling, shoot-
          ing, rebounding, and physical conditioning. There are many facets to one’s
          game—in sports and in trading. The successful firms pay attention to all
          of them.
               Mike and his partner Steve are correct to emphasize breathing in their
          training of traders. This exercise makes a worthwhile assignment for your
          development. The first step toward controlling emotional and cognitive
          arousal is controlling the level of arousal in the body. When we are filled
          with stresses and worries, we bring those to markets. When we sustain a
          quiet mind, we let markets come to us and free our minds to respond to
          the patterns we perceive. Write in journals, communicate with peers, and
          consult your trading statistics. These actions are all ways to make sense of
          your market experience so that you can then sit in front of the screen with

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          300                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          a quiet, confident mind. It does take dedicated time each day to sustain the
          quiet mind, but it comes more easily with experience. Find a room with no
          distractions—no noise—and keep yourself totally still as you fix your atten-
          tion on something in the room: an object on the wall, music in headphones,
          etc. Then breathe very deeply and slowly, keeping your attention as fixed
          as possible. You’ll find yourself able to tune out fear and greed, anxiety and
          overconfidence as you sustain a high level of concentration and fix your at-
          tention on an emotionally neutral stimulus. The best trading practices and
          environments cannot benefit you if you are not in a state to make good use
          of them. Quite literally, with each breath, you can be coaching yourself.


                     COACHING CUE

          I have found that if I start my day with physical exercise and biofeedback, I can
          sustain calm concentration as an eﬀective strategy for maximizing my energy
          and focus. If you start your day run down and distracted, you’re likely to become
          even more fatigued and scattered during the trading day. Part of preparation
          is to study the market; part is also to keep yourself in a physical and cognitive
          mode that maximizes performance.




          LESSON 90: USE DATA TO IMPROVE
          TRADING PERFORMANCE

          Rainsford “Rennie” Yang is the author of the Market Tells web site and
          newsletter (www.markettells.com), which generates trade ideas through
          historical analyses of stock market behavior. His service is unusually help-
          ful in finding trading edges, particularly with respect to generating trend-
          catcher alerts during the day. The ideas can either be traded outright or can
          be used to inform discretionary decisions from favored setups. For traders
          who don’t have the time, skills, or inclination to conduct their own histori-
          cal research (see Chapter 10), a service such as Market Tells is invaluable.
               David Adler is the Director of Trader DNA (www.traderdna.com),
          which markets a program for tracking trading performance over time. The
          software captures information about futures trades and generates a series
          of metrics that reveal areas of trading strength and weakness. This informa-
          tion is especially helpful for high-frequency traders, who would find it im-
          possible to manually enter trades into a log for analysis. Results are charted
          as well as summarized in print, providing easy-to-understand reports.
               When I asked Rennie to summarize his most useful self-coaching prac-
          tices, he most generously shared some of the patterns from his historical
          research. He included daily/weekly analysis and intraday analysis in his re-
          sponse, which I quote extensively in the following pages.

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           301


          Daily/Weekly Analysis
          “When advancers recently outnumbered decliners by more than a 3:1 mar-
          gin on the NYSE and the market continued to push higher over the next few
          sessions,” Rennie recounts, “I brought up the Master Spreadsheet where I
          conduct all of my testing and research. It contains the daily data back to
          1980 and weekly data back to 1950 on all of the major averages and all of
          the market internals (breadth, volume, new highs/lows, etc.) to make test-
          ing quick and easy. In this case, I searched for instances when the S&P
          was higher three days after a 3:1 positive breadth session and examined
          the market’s performance over the next two weeks. Such lopsided breadth
          days can mark buying climaxes, in which buying power is exhausted and
          the market trades lower short-term. But when the market remains on firm
          ground in the days following such a lopsided positive breadth session, I
          would expect the S&P to continue moving higher over the next two weeks.”
               Rennie Yang explains how to conduct this analysis: “To keep things
          simple, let’s assume I have a spreadsheet containing daily S&P 500 and
          NYSE advance/decline data. Column A has the date, while columns B and
          C contain the daily S&P 500 closing price and NYSE advance/decline ra-
          tio, respectively. Starting at the fifth row in column D, enter the following
          formula:

                              = if(and(c2 > 3, b5 > b2),(b15-b5)/b5,””)

              “This states: if the advance/decline ratio from three days ago was over
          3.0 and the S&P closed above its three-day ago close, show the percentage
          gain for the S&P over the next ten trading days. Fill this column down to
          the point where the data ends and quickly scan the results. You can imme-
          diately see that the hypothesis seems correct. Over the last 30 examples,
          the S&P has been higher 10 trading days later in 25 out of 30 cases, or
          83 percent of the time.”


              To get a sense for whether an edge is present, it is important to
              compare a historical pattern over X days with the market’s general
              tendency over X days.


              “That may look like a bullish edge,” Rennie points out, “but first you
          need to check the S&Ps at-any-time odds of posting a higher close 10 trad-
          ing days later. Here’s a quick and easy method. Go back to the fifth row
          in Column D of the sample spreadsheet above and change the formula to
          read “=if(b15>b5,1,’’’’).” This means that if the S&Ps close two weeks later
          is greater than today’s closing S&P, print a one, otherwise print noth-
          ing. Then fill this column down to the point where the data ends. In most

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008      13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          302                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          spreadsheet applications, such as Excel, you’ll see in the lower right corner
          the summation of all those 1s. Dividing that result by the number of days
          in the sample reveals the at-any-time odds—57 percent. In other words, on
          any given day, the chances that the S&P will be higher two weeks later have
          been 57 percent. That is far less than the 83 percent odds when the S&P is
          higher three days after a 3:1 breadth session. This confirms the original hy-
          pothesis that the chances for a market rally over the intermediate-term are
          far better than average, meaning there’s a clearly bullish edge.
               “Instead of relying on traditional indicators, most of which merely ma-
          nipulate and regurgitate price action, look beneath the surface of the major
          averages at the market internals such as breadth, up/down volume, new
          highs/lows, NYSE TICK action, etc,” Rennie advises. “This is the area in
          which I’ve found the majority of trading setups that stand up to historical
          testing. Does a surge in new 52-week lows portend an intermediate-term
          bottom? Is a 90 percent up volume day bullish? How about a cluster of 80
          percent up volume days in a short time frame? Just about any concept you
          can imagine can be quickly researched and tested with the proper prepa-
          ration. By maintaining your own version of a master spreadsheet and con-
          ducting your own testing and research, you’ll know when a concept truly
          provides a bullish or bearish edge. Consistently exploit that edge, and you’ll
          have a leg up on the competition.”

              It is powerful when you find a pattern with an edge, but even more
              powerful when your edge is the ability to find and trade many such
              patterns.



          Intraday Analysis
          “The NYSE TICK is probably the single most helpful intraday indicator,”
          Rennie Yang asserts. “It tells you, at a glance, how many issues last traded
          on an uptick versus a downtick. A reading of +500, for instance, means
          that, at that moment, 500 more issues last traded on an uptick. When you
          first view a chart of the NYSE TICK, it will look as if it’s too noisy to be
          of any use . . . But change your viewpoint and you’ll see an entirely differ-
          ent picture . . . You can actually hide the NYSE TICK itself and just plot the
          20-period moving average of the TICK to gain considerable insight into the
          supply/demand equation. Is the average holding above zero, meaning gen-
          erally more buying power, or is the average holding below zero, reflecting
          better selling pressure? That’s something every day trader should know.
               “Here’s another technique for utilizing intraday TICK readings,” Ren-
          nie offers. “Many data feeds such as e-Signal allow you to export data in
          real time to a spreadsheet. Through a technology known as DDE (dynamic

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008     13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                           303


          data exchange), it’s a relatively simple process to have one-minute NYSE
          TICK data updating constantly in your spreadsheet. Once this has been ac-
          complished, you can easily create your own cumulative TICK. Here’s how:
          Set up a spreadsheet with columns A, B, and C containing the date, time,
          and close of the NYSE TICK ($TICK in e-Signal). It should start at row
          2 and contain the last 390 one-minute bars, the equivalent of one full trad-
          ing day. In the first row of column D, enter a zero. In the first row of column
          E, enter a space, followed by today’s date (the space is due to a quirk on
          e-Signal’s part). Then jump down to the second row of column D and enter
          the following formula:

                                   = if(a2 = $E$1,c2+d1,d1)

          “and fill it down through all 390 rows. This states that, if the date matches
          today, then take the most recent closing one-minute TICK and add it to
          the running total for the session. As the data comes in, this will automat-
          ically build a cumulative TICK in column D, which can then be charted
          to provide a real-time intraday chart of the cumulative TICK. Draw a line
          at the zero mark and watch the cumulative TICK reveal the underlying
          buying and selling pressure that is hidden in the noise of the NYSE TICK.”


              The cumulative TICK reveals the trend of daily sentiment.


               David Adler approaches the use of data for self-coaching in a different
          manner, focusing on the assessment of trading performance itself. “The
          philosophy behind TraderDNA, which I firmly believe,” he explains, “is the
          idea of being cognizant of what happened (in terms of your performance)
          within a given session, week, month, etc. of your trading, so that, going for-
          ward, the negative aspects can be minimized and the positive can be max-
          imized. The fundamental idea is that, if the trader is able to look back on
          a certain time period of his trading and understand more about the overall
          result, then he can be proactive . . . in preventing the same mistakes going
          forward. Likewise, he can identify strengths and focus on situations that
          are likely to result in a profit based upon what his past trading has shown.
               “Our users extract their order data from their front-end software,”
          David Adler notes, “and import the data into TraderDNA. This affords them
          the opportunity to thoroughly analyze their data in order to understand
          more about the strengths and weaknesses of their trading: specifically,
          their performance trends, where their losses came from, characteristics
          of their trades, the differences in their winners and losers, amongst other
          things.” Here are some of the analytics provided by the software, along with
          David’s commentary:

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55    Printer: Yet to come




          304                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



           1. Hour of day analysis. “Because markets trade differently through-
              out the day,” David explains, “many of our users measure their perfor-
              mance (in terms of average P/L, risk taken, profit opportunity, number
              of winners/losers, size of winners/losers) by the time of day the trade
              occurred. This helps them to use their past performance to determine
              the most ideal times for them to trade a given market.”
           2. Winning trades versus losing trades. “In looking for differences in
              winning and losing trades, it’s helpful—and necessary—to group all
              winners together and group all losers together and then apply metrics
              to each category,” David points out. “The value in doing so is the oppor-
              tunity for you to discover the differences in your winning trades and
              your losing trades.” Among the metrics applied to both the winning
              and losing trades are the number of winners and losers; the average
              win and average loss size; the number of times a trader added to win-
              ning and losing positions; the average amount of heat taken in a trade
              before it was covered for a profit or loss; and the average time it has
              taken to hit the point of maximum heat. The latter is an especially in-
              teresting metric in that, by comparing winning and losing trades, it can
              help guide traders to formulate rules for the proper amount of time to
              be holding positions.


              If you know how much heat you take on winners versus losers and
              how long it takes you to reach that point of maximum heat, you
              can set guidelines for when and where it might be prudent to cut
              your losers.


           3. Comparing results among market/product traded. “Traders that
              trade more than one market/product sometimes have difficulty inter-
              preting how their performance compares in their trading of each mar-
              ket,” David Adler observes. “Oftentimes the trader will be very prof-
              itable in one market but have consistently less profit or even losses in
              other markets. If you trade more than one market, it’s important to split
              up any analysis or performance reporting that you do by the markets
              you trade.” Among the metrics he applies to different markets are: the
              total amount earned/lost per market; the average win and average loss
              for each market; the number of consecutive winning and losing trades
              for each market; the average risk incurred among trades for each mar-
              ket; the average lost profit opportunity for each market; the number
              of times you added to losing and winning positions per market; the
              average amount of time spent in losing trades per market; the maxi-
              mum losing and winning trades per market; and breakdowns by hour
              of the day for each market. My experience with metrics is that these

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 30, 2008      13:55     Printer: Yet to come




          Lessons from Trading Professionals                                            305

              breakdowns by market will often shift over time, as certain markets
              yield greater opportunities and others go dry. Tracking results over
              time can be a great way of seeing, in real time, when and how mar-
              kets are changing.

               “I’ve seen numerous traders increase their P/L by minimizing trading
          losses and increasing the frequency and/or size of their winners after ap-
          plying one or more of the techniques above,” David concludes. “From what
          I’ve seen, it’s most effective to conduct your analysis or review of your trad-
          ing no more than once a week, and ideally once every two weeks or even
          once a month.”
               Intuition—the result of implicit learning that occurs after long peri-
          ods of observing market patterns—may play an important role in getting
          traders into and out of positions. Even the most intuitive and discretionary
          trading, however, can benefit from analytics: knowing which markets
          and time frames offer opportunity and measuring how well you’re taking
          advantage of that opportunity. Ultimately, you are your own trading sys-
          tem. Your task, as your own performance coach, is to know how your sys-
          tem operates, avoid its shortcomings, and maximize its strengths. The in-
          sights and tools provided by Rennie and Dave are excellent guides in the
          quest to become more scientific in the management of our trading business.


                     COACHING CUE

          The contributors to this chapter have provided a wealth of insights, derived
          from ﬁrsthand experience, as to the principles and practices that can improve
          your trading. A worthwhile exercise is to review each of the contributor’s ideas
          and identify the overlap: the points emphasized by more than one contributor.
          These points of overlap represent important best practices that can guide your
          eﬀorts going forward.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemen-
          tal resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter
          9: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-nine-links.html
               The contributors to this chapter maintain their own web sites, which
          offer a wealth of resources to developing traders. Here are links to the
          contributors to this chapter and their web sites:

P1: JYS
c09     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 30, 2008     13:55   Printer: Yet to come




          306                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/contributors-
          to-daily-trading-coach.html
              For background on technical analysis, Brian Shannon’s book is a useful
          resource for mentorship:
          www.technicalanalysisbook.com/
              Ray Barros’s book The Nature of Trends details his approach to trad-
          ing and trading psychology; see also the seminars he offers on these topics:
          www.tradingsuccess.com/
              John Forman’s book The Essentials of Trading is an excellent in-
          troduction to the practice and business of trading: www.theessentialsof
          trading.com/Blog/index.php/the-essentials-of-trading/
              The NewsFlashr site is a great way of staying on top of many pop-
          ular trading-related blogs, as well as news: www.newsflashr.com/feeds/
          business blogs.html

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




                                    CHAPTER 10



                               Looking for
                                the Edge
                          Finding Historical Patterns
                                  in Markets



                    Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthu-
                    siasm and superstition.
                                                           —Adam Smith



                raders commonly refer to having an edge in markets. What this means

         T      is that they have a positive expectancy regarding the returns from
                their trades. Card counting can provide an edge to a poker player,
          but how can traders count the cards of their markets and put probabil-
          ities on their side? One way of accomplishing this is historical investi-
          gation. While history may not repeat exactly in markets, we can iden-
          tify patterns that have been associated with a directional edge in the
          past and hypothesize that these will yield similar tendencies in the im-
          mediate future. By knowing market history, we identify patterns to guide
          trade ideas.
               So how can we investigate market history to uncover such patterns?
          This has been a recurring topic of reader interest on the TraderFeed blog.
          If you’re going to mentor yourself as a trader, your efforts will be greatly
          aided by your ability to test the patterns you trade. After all, if you know
          the edge associated with what you’re trading, you’re most likely to sustain
          the confidence needed to see those trades through.
               A thorough presentation of testing market ideas would take a book
          in itself, but this chapter should get you started. Armed with a historical
          database and Excel, you can greatly improve your ability to find worthy
          market hypotheses to guide your trading. Let’s get started . . .




                                                                                     307

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          308                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 91: USE HISTORICAL
          PATTERNS IN TRADING

          A trading guru declares that he has turned bearish because the S&P 500
          Index has fallen below its 200-day average. Is this a reasonable basis for
          setting your trading or investing strategy? Is there truly an edge to selling
          the market when it moves below its moving averages?
               The only way we can determine the answer is through investigation.
          Otherwise, investing and trading become little more than exercises in faith
          and superstition. Because markets have behaved in a particular way in the
          past does not guarantee that they will act that way now. Still, history pro-
          vides the best guide we have. Markets, like people, will never be perfectly
          predictable. But if we’ve observed people over time in different conditions,
          we can arrive at some generalizations about their tendencies. Similarly,
          a careful exploration of markets under different historical conditions can
          help us find regularities worth exploiting.
               As it turns out, moving average strategies—so often touted in the pop-
          ular trading press—are not so robust. As of my writing this, since 1980, the
          average 200-day gain in the S&P 500 Index following occasions when we’ve
          traded above the 200-day moving average has been 8.68 percent. When
          we’ve been below the 200-day moving average, the next 200 days in the S&P
          500 Index have returned 7.32 percent. That’s not a huge difference, and it’s
          hardly grounds to turn bearish on a market. When David Aronson tested
          more than 6,000 technical indicators for his excellent book, Evidence-
          Based Technical Analysis, he found a similar lack of robustness: not a sin-
          gle indicator emerged as a significant predictor of future market returns.

              Investigate before you invest: Common trading wisdom is uncom-
              monly wrong.

               One way that historical patterns aid our self-coaching is by helping us
          distinguish myth from fact. “The trend is your friend” we commonly hear.
          My research on the blog, however, has consistently documented worse
          returns following winning days, weeks, and months than following los-
          ing ones. It is not enough to accept market wisdom at face value: just as
          you would research the reliability of a vehicle before making a purchase, it
          makes sense to research the reliability and validity of trading strategies.
               There are traders who make the opposite mistake and trade mechani-
          cally from historical market patterns. I have seen an unusual proportion of
          these traders blow up. Market patterns are relative to the historical period
          that we study. If I examine the past few years of returns in a bull mar-
          ket, I will find significant patterns that will completely vanish in a bear

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          309

          market. If I include many bull and bear markets in my database, I will go
          back so far in time that I will be studying periods that are radically different
          from the current one in terms of who and what are moving markets. Auto-
          mated, algorithmic strategies have completely reshaped market patterns,
          particularly over short time periods. If you study precomputer-era markets
          you would miss this influence altogether. Select a look-back period for his-
          torical analysis that is long enough to cover different markets but not so
          lengthy as to leave us with irrelevant data is as much art as science.
               My approach to trading treats historical market patterns as qual-
          itative research data. In a nutshell, qualitative research is hypothesis-
          generating research, not hypothesis-testing research. I view the patterns
          of markets as sources of trading hypotheses, not as fixed conclusions. The
          basic hypothesis is that the next trading period will not differ significantly
          from the recent past ones. If a pattern has existed over the past X periods,
          we can hypothesize that it will persist over the next period. Like any hy-
          pothesis, this is a testable proposition. It is an idea backed by support, not
          just faith or superstition, but it is not accepted as a fixed truth to be traded
          blindly.


              Historical testing yields hypotheses for trading, not conclusions.


               For this reason, I do not emphasize the use of inferential statistics in
          the investigation of historical patterns. I am looking for qualitative differ-
          ences much as a psychologist might look for various behavior patterns in a
          person seeking therapy. In short, I’m looking to generate a hypothesis, not
          test one. The testing, in the trading context, is reflected in my trading re-
          sults: if my returns significantly exceed those expected by chance, we can
          conclude that I am trading knowledge, not randomness.
               When we adopt a qualitative perspective, the issue of look-back period
          becomes less thorny. As long as we consider the results of historical in-
          vestigations to be nothing more than hypotheses, we can draw our ideas
          from the past few weeks, months, years, or decades of trading. The basic
          hypothesis remains the same: that the next time period will not differ sig-
          nificantly from the most recent ones. With that in mind, we can frame mul-
          tiple hypotheses derived from different patterns over different time frames.
          One hypothesis, for example, might predicate buying the market based on
          strong action at the close of the prior day, with the anticipation of tak-
          ing out the previous day’s R1 pivot level. A second hypothesis might also
          entail buying the market based on a pattern of weakness during the previ-
          ous week’s trading. When multiple independent patterns point in the same
          direction, we still don’t have a certain conclusion, but we do have a firm
          hypothesis.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          310                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH




              When independent patterns point to similar directional edges, we
              have especially promising hypotheses for trading.


               Of course, if we generate enough hypotheses, some are going to look
          promising simply as a matter of chance. We could look at all combina-
          tions of Dow stocks, day of week, and week of year and the odds are
          good that we’d find some pattern for some stock that looks enticing, such
          as (to invent one possibility) IBM tends to rise on the first Wednesday of
          months during the summer season. Good hypotheses need to make sense;
          you should have some idea of why they might be valid. It makes sense, for
          instance, to buy after a period of weakness because you would benefit from
          short covering and an influx of money from the sidelines. It doesn’t make
          sense to buy a stock on alternate Thursdays during months that begin with
          M—no matter what the historical data tell you.
               When you’re first learning to generate good hypotheses, your best bet
          is to keep it simple and get your feel for the kinds of patterns that are
          most promising. Many of your initial candidates will emerge from inves-
          tigations of charts. Perhaps you’ll notice that it has been worth selling a
          stock when it rises on unusually high volume, or that markets have tended
          to bounce following a down open that follows a down day. Such ideas are
          worth checking out historically. What patterns have you noticed in your
          trading and observation? Write down these patterns and keep them simple:
          these patterns will get you started in our qualitative research.


                     COACHING CUE

          Several newsletters do an excellent job of testing historical patterns and can
          provide you with inspiration for ideas of your own. Check out the contributions
          of Jason Goepfert, Rob Hanna, and Rennie Yang in Chapter 9, along with their
          links. All three are experienced traders and investigators of market patterns.




          LESSON 92: FRAME GOOD HYPOTHESES
          WITH THE RIGHT DATA

          In the previous lesson, I encouraged you to keep hypotheses simple. This
          is not just for your learning; in general, we will generate the most robust
          hypotheses if we don’t try to get too fancy and add many conditions to our
          ideas. Ask a question that is simple and straightforward, such as, “What

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                        311


          typically happens the week following a very strong down week?” This ques-
          tion is better than asking, “What typically happens the week following a
          very strong down week during the month of March when gold has been
          up and bonds have been down?” The latter question will yield a small sam-
          ple of matching occasions—perhaps only three over many years—so that
          it would be difficult to generalize from these. While I will occasionally look
          at patterns with a small N simply as a way to determine if the current mar-
          ket is behaving in historically unusual ways, it is the patterns that have at
          least 20 occurrences during a look-back period that will merit the greatest
          attention. The more conditions we add to a search, the more we limit the
          sample and make generalization difficult.


              The simplest patterns will tend to be the most robust.


                Of course, the number of occurrences in a look-back period will partly
          depend on the frequency of data that you investigate. With 415 minutes in a
          trading day for stock index futures, you would have 8,300 observations of
          one-minute patterns in a 20-day period. If you were investigating daily data,
          the same number of observations would have to cover a period exceed-
          ing 30 years. Databases with high frequency data can become unwieldy in
          a hurry and require dedicated database applications. The simple histori-
          cal investigations that I conduct utilize database functions in a flat Excel
          file. When I investigate a limited number of variables over a manageable
          time frame, I find this to be adequate to my needs. Clearly, a system de-
          veloper who is going to test many variables over many time frames would
          need a relational database or a dedicated system-testing platform, such as
          TradeStation. The kind of hypothesis-generating activities covered in this
          chapter are most appropriate for discretionary traders who would like to
          be a bit more systematic and selective in their selection of market patterns
          to trade—not formal system developers.
                Before you frame hypotheses worthy of historical exploration, you
          need to create your data set. This data set would include a range of vari-
          ables over a defined time period. The variables that you select would
          reflect the markets and indicators that you typically consult when mak-
          ing discretionary trading decisions. For instance, if you trade off lead-lag
          relationships among stock market sectors, you’ll need to include sector
          indexes/ETFs in your database. If you trade gap patterns in individual
          stocks, you’ll need daily open-high-low-close prices for each issue that you
          trade at the very least. Some of the patterns I track in my own trading in-
          volve the number of stocks making new highs or lows; this is included in
          my database with separate columns on a sheet dedicated to each.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          312                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



              As you might suspect, a database can get large quickly. With a column
          in a spreadsheet for each of the following: date, open price, high price,
          low price, closing price, volume, rate of change, and several variables
          (indicators) that you track, you can have a large sheet for each stock or
          futures contract that you trade—particularly if you are archiving intraday
          data. I strongly recommend that beginners at this kind of historical
          investigation get their feet wet with daily data. This process will keep
          the data sets manageable and will be helpful in framing longer timeframe
          hypotheses that can supplement intraday observation and judgment. Many
          good swing patterns can be found with daily data and clean, affordable
          data are readily available.


              Some of the most promising historical patterns occur over a period
              of several days to several weeks.

               There are several possible sources for your historical database. Many
          real-time platforms archive considerable historical data on their servers.
          You can download these data from programs such as e-Signal and Real Tick
          (two vendors I’ve personally used) and update your databases manually at
          the end of the trading day. The advantage of this solution is that it keeps
          you from the expense of purchasing historical data from vendors. It also
          enables you to capture just the data you want in the way you want to store
          them. This is how I collect most of my intraday data for stock index futures
          and such variables as NYSE TICK. My spreadsheet is laid out in columns in
          ways that I find intuitive. The entire process of updating a sheet, including
          built in charts, takes a few minutes at most.
               A second way you can go, which I also use, is to purchase his-
          torical data from a vendor. I obtain daily data from Pinnacle Data
          (www.pinnacledata.com), which includes an online program for updating
          that is idiot-proof. Many of their data fields go back far in market history,
          and many of them cover markets and indicators that I would not be able
          to easily archive on my own. The data are automatically saved in Excel
          sheets, with a separate sheet for each data element. That means that you
          have to enter the different sheets and pull out all the data relevant to a par-
          ticular hypothesis and time frame. The various fields can be copied onto a
          single worksheet that you can use for your historical investigations (more
          on this later). Among the data that I find useful from Pinnacle Data are
          advance-decline information; new highs/lows; volume (including up/down
          volume); interest rates; commodity and currency prices; and weekly data.
          These data are general market data, not data for individual equities. When
          I collect individual equity data, I generally find the historical data from the
          real-time quotation platforms to be adequate to my needs.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         313


               For the collection of clean intraday data, I’ve found TickData (www.
          tickdata.com) to be a particularly valuable vendor. The data management
          software that accompanies the historical data enables you to place the data
          in any time frame and store them as files within Excel. This is a great way to
          build a historical database of intraday information quickly, including price
          data for stocks and futures and a surprising array of indicator data.
               If you go with a historical data vendor, you’ll have plenty of data for
          exploration and the updating process will be easy. Manual updating of
          data from charting platforms is more cumbersome and time-consuming,
          but obviously cheaper if you’re already subscribing to the data service. It
          is important thing that you obtain the data you most want from reliable
          sources in user-friendly ways. If the process becomes too cumbersome,
          you’ll quickly abandon it.
               As your own trading coach, you want to make the learning process
          stimulating and enjoyable; that is how you’ll sustain positive motivation.
          Focus on what you already look at in your trading and limit your initial
          data collection to those elements. Price, volume, and a few basic variables
          for each stock, sector, index, or futures contract that you typically look at
          will be plenty at first. Adding data is never a problem. The key is to organize
          the information in a way that will make it easy for you to pull out what you
          want, when you want it. As you become proficient at observing historical
          patterns, you’ll be pleasantly surprised at how this process prepares you
          for recognizing the patterns as they emerge in real time.


                     COACHING CUE

          Consider setting up separate data archives for daily and weekly data, so that
          you can investigate patterns covering periods from a single day to several
          weeks. You’d be surprised how many hypotheses can be generated from simple
          open-high-low-close price data alone. How do returns diﬀer after an up day
          versus a down day? What happens after a down day in which the day’s range
          is the highest of the past 20 days? What happens after three consecutive up
          or down days? How do the returns diﬀer following a down day during a down
          week versus a down day during an up week? You can learn quite a bit simply
          by investigating price data.




          LESSON 93: EXCEL BASICS

          In this lesson, I’ll go over just a few essentials of Excel that I employ
          in examining historical market data. If you do not already have a basic

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          314                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          understanding of spreadsheets (how cells are named, how to copy infor-
          mation and paste it into cells, how to copy data from one cell to another,
          how to create a chart of the data in a sheet, how to write simple formulas
          into cells), you’ll need a beginning text for Excel users. All of the things
          we’ll be reviewing here are true basics; we won’t be using workbooks link-
          ing multiple sheets, and we won’t be writing complex macros. Everything
          you need to formulate straightforward hypotheses from market data can
          be accomplished with these basics.
               So let’s get started. Your first step in searching for market patterns
          and themes is to download your historical data into Excel. Your data ven-
          dors will have instructions for downloading data; generally this will in-
          volve copying the data from the charting application or from the data ven-
          dors’ servers and pasting them into Excel. If, for instance, you were using
          e-Signal (www.esignal.com) as a real-time data/charting application, you
          would activate the chart of the data you’re interested in by clicking on that
          chart. You then click on the menu item Tools and then click on the option
          for Data Export. A spreadsheet-like screen will pop up with the chart data
          included. Along the very top row, you can check the boxes for the data ele-
          ments you want in your spreadsheet. If there are data in the chart that you
          don’t need for your pattern search, you simply uncheck the boxes for those
          columns.
               On that spreadsheet screen in e-Signal, if you click on the button for
          Copy to Clipboard, you will place all of the selected data on the Windows
          clipboard, where the data elements are stored as alphanumeric text. You
          then open a blank sheet in Excel, click on the Excel menu item for Edit,
          and select the option for Paste. That will place the selected data into your
          Excel spreadsheet.
               If you had wanted more historical data than popped up in the e-Signal
          spreadsheet-like screen, you would have to click your chart and drag your
          mouse to the right, moving view of the data into the past. Move it back as
          far as you need and then go through the process of clicking on Tools, se-
          lecting Data Export, etc. If you need more historical data than e-Signal (or
          your current charting/data vendor) carries on their servers, that’s when
          you’ll need to subscribe to a dedicated historical data source such as
          Pinnacle Data (www.pinnacledata.com).

              If you need data going back many years for multiple indicators or
              instruments, you’ll want to download data from a historical data
              vendor who has checked the data for completeness and accuracy.

               If you’re using Pinnacle Data, you can automatically update your en-
          tire database daily with its Goweb application. The program places all the
          updated data into Excel sheets that are stored on the C drive in a folder

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         315

          labeled Data. The IDXDATA folder within Data contains spreadsheets with
          each instrument or piece of data (S&P 500 Index open-high-low-close; num-
          ber of NYSE stocks making 52-week highs) in its own spreadsheet. Once
          you open these sheets, you can highlight the data from the historical pe-
          riod you’re interested in, click on the Edit menu item in Excel, click on the
          Copy option, open a fresh, blank spreadsheet, click on Edit, and then click
          on the Paste option. By copying from the Pinnacle sheets and pasting into
          your own worksheets, you don’t modify your historical data files when you
          manipulate the data for your analyses.
               Personally, I would not subscribe to a data/charting service that did
          not facilitate an easy downloading of data into spreadsheets for analysis.
          It’s also helpful to have data services that carry a large amount of intraday
          and daily data on their servers, so that you can easily retrieve all the data
          you need from a single source. In general, I’ve found e-Signal and Pinnacle
          to be reliable clean sources of data. There are others out there, however,
          and I encourage you to shop around.


              When you download data for analysis, save your sheets in fold-
              ers that will help you organize your findings and give the sheets
              names that you’ll recognize. Over time, you’ll perform many analy-
              ses; saving and organizing your work will prevent you from having
              to reinvent wheels later.

               Once you have the data in your sheet, you’ll need to use formulas in Ex-
          cel to get the data into the form you need to examine patterns of interest.
          Formulas in Excel will begin with an = sign. If, for example, you wanted to
          calculate an average value for the first 10 periods of price data (where the
          earliest data are in row 2 and later data below), you might enter into the cell
          labeled D11: “=average(C2:C11),” without typing the quotation marks. That
          will give you the simple average (mean) of the price data in cells C1 through
          C10. If you want to create a moving average, you could simply click on the
          D10 cell, click the Excel menu item for copy, left-click your mouse and drag
          from cell D11 down, and release. Your column D cells will update the aver-
          age for each new cell in column C, creating a 10-period moving average.
               As a rule, each column in Excel (labeled with the letters) will rep-
          resent a variable of interest. Usually, my column A is date, column B is
          time (if I’m exploring intraday data), column C is open price, column D is
          high price, column E is low price, and column F is closing price. Column G
          might be devoted to volume data for each of those periods (if that’s part
          of what I’m investigating); columns H and above will be devoted to other
          variables of interest, such as the data series for another index or stock or
          the readings of a market indicator for that period. Each row of data is a
          time period, such as a day. Generally, my data are organized so that the

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21   Printer: Yet to come




          316                                                THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          earliest data are in row 2 and the later data fall underneath. I save row 1
          for data labels, so that each column is labeled clearly: DATE, OPEN, HIGH,
          LOW, CLOSE, etc. You’ll see why this labeling is helpful when we get to the
          process of sorting the data.
               Here are some simple statistical functions that I use frequently to ex-
          amine data in a qualitative way. Each example assumes that we’re investi-
          gating the data in column C, from cells 1 through 10:

            r =median(C2:C11) – The median value for the data in the formula.
            r =max(C2:C11) – The largest value for the data in the formula.
            r =min(C2:C11) – The smallest value for the data in the formula.
            r =stdev(C2:C11) – The standard deviation for the data in the formula.
            r =correl(C2:C11,D2:D11) – The correlation between the data in colu-
              mns C and D, cells 1–10.

               Much of the time, our analyses won’t be of the raw data, but will be of
          the changes in the data from period to period. The formula =(C3-C2) gives
          the difference from cell C2 to cell C3. If we want to express this differ-
          ence as a percentage (so that we’re analyzing percent price changes from
          period to period), the formula would read = ((C3-C2)/C2)* 100. This takes
          the difference of cells C3 and C2 as a proportion of the initial value (C2),
          multiplied by 100 to give a percentage.
               When we want to update later cells with the percentage difference in-
          formation, we don’t need to rewrite the formulas. Instead, as noted above,
          we click on the cell with the formula, click on the Excel menu item Edit,
          click on copy, then left click the cell below the one with the formula and
          drag down as far as we want the data. The spreadsheet will calculate price
          changes for each of the time periods that you selected by dragging. This
          means that if you save your formulas into worksheets, updating your data is
          as simple as downloading the fresh data from your vendor, pasting into the
          appropriate cells in your sheets, and copying the data from formulas for the
          cells representing the new data period. Once you’ve organized your sheets
          in this manner, it thus only takes a few minutes a day to completely update.

              Once you create a spreadsheet with the appropriate formulas, up-
              dating your analyses is mostly a matter of pasting and copying. As
              a result, you can update many analyses in just a few minutes.

               Once again, the basic formulas, arrangement of rows and columns, and
          copying of data will take some practice before you move on to actual analy-
          ses. I strongly encourage you to become proficient with downloading your
          data from your vendor/application and manipulating the data in Excel with
          copying, pasting, and formula writing before moving on. Once you have

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008       13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                            317


          these skills, you’ll have them for life, and they will greatly aid your ability
          to generate promising trading hypotheses.


                      COACHING CUE

          Trading platforms that support Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) enable you to
          link spreadsheets to the platform’s data servers, so that the spreadsheets will
          populate in real time. This is helpful for tracking indicators as you trade, and it
          can also be a time-eﬃcient way to archive data of interest. See Rennie Yang’s
          segment in Chapter 9 for an illustration of the use of DDE.




          LESSON 94: VISUALIZE YOUR DATA

          One of the best ways to explore data for possible relationships is to actu-
          ally see the data for yourself. You can create simple charts in Excel that
          will enable you to see how two variables are related over time, identify-
          ing possible patterns that you might not have noticed from the spreadsheet
          rows and columns. For instance, when charting an indicator against a mar-
          ket average, you may notice divergence patterns that precede changes in
          market direction. Should you notice such patterns frequently, they might
          form the basis for worthwhile historical explorations.
               Again, a basic introductory text for Excel users will cover the details
          of creating different kinds of charts, from column charts to line graphs to
          pie charts. You’ll also learn about the nuances of changing the colors on a
          chart, altering the graphics, and labeling the various lines and axes. In this
          lesson, I’ll walk you through a few basics that will get you started in your
          data exploration.


              Many times, you can identify potential trading hypotheses by see-
              ing relationships among data elements.


               A simple chart to begin with will have dates in column A, price data in
          column B, and a second set of price data in column C (see Table 10.1). This
          chart is helpful when you want to visualize how movements in the first trad-
          ing instrument are related to movements in the second. For basic practice,
          here are some hypothetical data to type into Excel, with the data labels in
          the first row. Column A has the dates, column B contains closing prices for
          a market index, and column C has the closing prices for a mining stock.
               To create the chart, highlight the data with your mouse, including
          the data labels, and click on the Excel menu item for Insert. You’ll select

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 29, 2008     13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          318                                                 THE DAILY TRADING COACH


                     TABLE 10.1 Sample Market Data

                     Date                Market Index          Mining Stock

                     12/1/2008           1200.25               9.46
                     12/2/2008           1221.06               9.32
                     12/3/2008           1228.01               9.33
                     12/4/2008           1230.75               9.30
                     12/5/2008           1255.37               9.18
                     12/8/2008           1234.44               9.24
                     12/9/2008           1230.24               9.22
                     12/10/2008          1228.68               9.27
                     12/11/2008          1235.56               9.20
                     12/12/2008          1240.20               9.22
                     12/15/2008          1251.98               9.12
                     12/16/2008          1255.50               9.15
                     12/17/2008          1239.88               9.29
                     12/18/2008          1226.51               9.39




          Chart and a menu of different kinds of charts will appear. You’ll click on
          Line and select the chart option at the top left in the submenu. That is
          a simple line chart. Then click Next, and you will see a small picture of
          your chart, the range of your data, and whether the series are in rows or
          columns. Your selection should be columns, because that is how you have
          your variables separated. Click Next again and you will see Step 3 of 4 in
          the Chart Wizard, allowing you to type in a chart title and labels for the
          X and Y axes. Go ahead and type in Market Index and Mining Stock for the
          title, Date for the Category (X) axis label, and Price for the Value (Y) axis
          label. Then click Next.
               The Step 4 of 4 screen will ask you if you want the chart as an object
          in your spreadsheet, or if you want the chart to be on a separate sheet. Go
          ahead and select the option for “As new sheet.” Then click Finish.
               What you’ll see is that the Wizard has recognized the date information
          from column A and placed it on the X-axis. The Wizard has also given us a
          single Y-axis and scaled it according to the high and low values in the data.
          Unfortunately, this leaves us unable to see much of the ups and downs in
          the mining stock data, since the price of the stock is much smaller than the
          price of the index.
               To correct this problem, point your cursor at the line on the chart for
          your Market Index and right click. A menu will pop up, and you will select
          the option for Format Data Series. Click the tab for Axes and then click
          on the button for “Plot Series on Secondary Axis.” When you do that, the
          picture of the chart underneath the buttons will change, and you’ll notice

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          319

          now that you have two Y-axes: one for the Market Index price data and
          one for the Mining Stock data. You’ll be able to see their relative ups and
          downs much more clearly. Click on OK and you will see your new chart.
          If you’d like the Y-axes to have new labels, you can place your cursor on
          the center of the chart (away from the lines for the data) and right click.
          A menu will pop up, and you’ll select Chart Options. That will give you a
          screen enabling you to type in new labels for the Value (Y) axis (at left)
          and the Second value (Y) axis (at right).
               If you right click on either of the two lines in the chart and, from the
          pop-up menu select Format Data Series, you’ll see a tab for Patterns. You
          can click the arrow beside the option for Weight and make the line thicker.
          You can click the arrow beside the option for Color and change the color
          of the line.
               If you right-click on the X- or Y-axes, you’ll get a pop-up menu; click on
          Format Axis. If you select the tab for Font, you can choose the typeface,
          font style, and size of the print for the axis labels. If you select the tab for
          Scale, you can change the range of values for the axis. With a little practice,
          you can customize the look of your charts.
               So what does your chart tell you? You can see that the Mining Stock is
          not moving in unison with the Market Index. When the index shows large
          rises or declines, the stock is tending to move in the opposite direction. By
          itself, over such a short period, that won’t tell you anything you’d want to
          hang your hat on, but it does raise interesting questions:
            r Why is the mining stock moving opposite to the market index? Might
              the mining stock be moving in unison with the gold market instead?
            r If the mining stock is moving with gold, is gold also moving opposite to
              the market index? If so, why might that be? Might there be a common
              influence on both of them: the strength of the U.S. dollar?
            r Does this relationship occur over intraday time frames? Might we be
              able to identify some buy or sell signals in the mining stock when we
              see selling or buying in the broad market?


              Reviewing charts that you create helps you see intermarket and
              intramarket relationships.


               Many times, investigating relationships through charts leads you to
          worthwhile questions, which may then lead you to interesting and prof-
          itable trading ideas. The key is asking “Why?” What might be responsible
          for the relationship I am observing? Remember, in your own self-coaching,
          you want to be generating hypotheses, and there is no better way than plain
          old brainstorming. When you can actually see how the data are related to

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          320                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          each other in graphical form, it is easier to accomplish that brainstorming.
          You won’t arrive at hard and fast conclusions, but you’ll be on your way
          toward generating promising trading ideas.


                     COACHING CUE

          Plot charts of the S&P 500 Index (SPY) against the major sector ETFs from the
          S&P 500 universe as a great way to observe leading and lagging sectors, as well
          as divergences at market highs and lows. The sectors I follow most closely are:
          XLB (Materials); XLI (Industrials); XLY (Consumer Discretionary); XLP (Consumer
          Staples); XLE (Energy); XLF (Financial); XLV (Health Care); and XLK (Technology).
          If you want to bypass such charting, you can view excellent sector-related indi-
          cators and charts at the Decision Point site (www.decisionpoint.com). Another
          excellent site for stock and sector charts is Barchart (www.barchart.com).




          LESSON 95: CREATE YOUR
          INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT
          VARIABLES

          When I organize my spreadsheets, I generally place my raw data furthest
          to the left (columns A, B, C, etc.); transformations of the raw data into
          independent variables in the middle; and dependent variables furthest to
          the right. Let’s take a look at what this means.
              Your independent variables are what we might call candidate
          predictors. They are variables that we think have an effect on the markets
          we’re trading. For example, let’s say that we’re investigating the impact of
          price change over the previous day of trading (independent variable) on the
          next day’s return for the S&P 500 Index (dependent variable). The raw data
          would consist of price data for the S&P 500 Index over the look-back period
          that we select. The independent variable would be a moving calculation of
          the prior day’s return. The dependent variable would be a calculation of the
          return over the next day. The independent variable is what we think might
          give us a trading edge; the dependent variable is what we would be trading
          to exploit that edge.

              If I keep my raw data to the left in the spreadsheet, followed by
              transformations of the raw data to form the independent variable,
              and then followed by the dependent variable, I keep analyses clear
              from spreadsheet to spreadsheet.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          321


               Let’s set that up as an exercise. We’ll download data for the S&P 500
          Index (cash close) for the past 1,000 trading days. That information will
          give us roughly four years of daily data. If I obtain the data from Pinnacle
          Data, I’ll open a blank sheet in Excel; click on the Excel menu item for
          File; click Open; go to the Data folder in the C drive; double-click on the
          IDXDATA folder; select All Files as the Files of type; and double-click the
          S&P 500 file. I’ll highlight the cells for the past 1,000 sessions; click on
          the Edit menu item in Excel; click on Copy; open a new, blank spread-
          sheet; then click the Edit menu item again; and click Paste, with the cur-
          sor highlighting the A2 cell. The data from the Pinnacle sheet will ap-
          pear in my worksheet, leaving row A for data labels (Date, Open, High,
          Low, Close).
               If you download your data from another source, your menu items to ac-
          cess the data will differ, but the result will be the same: you’ll copy the data
          from your source and paste them into the blank spreadsheet at cell A2, then
          create your data labels. As a result, your raw data will occupy columns A–E.
          (Column A will be Date; column B will be Open; column C will be High; col-
          umn D will be Low; and column E will be Close.) Now, for the data label for
          column F (cell F1), you can type (without quotation marks): “SP(1).” This
          is your independent variable, the current day’s rate of change in the index.
          Your first entry will go into cell F3 and will be (again without quotations
          marks): “=((E3-E2)/E2)* 100).” This is the percentage change in the index
          from the close of the session at A2 to the close of the session at A3.
               Now let’s create our dependent variable in cell G7, with column G la-
          beled SP+1 at G1. Your formula for cell G3 will be “=((E4-E3)/E3)* 100).”
          This represents the next day’s percentage return for the index.
               To complete your sheet, you would click and highlight the formula
          cells at F3 and G3; click on the Excel menu item for Edit; and select the
          option for Copy. You’ll see the F3 and G3 cells specially highlighted. Then,
          with your cursor highlighting cells F4 and G4, drag your mouse down the
          full length of the data set and release, highlighting all those cells. Click
          again on the Excel menu item for Edit, then select Paste. Your spreadsheet
          will calculate the formulas for each of the cells and the data portion of your
          spreadsheet will be finished. The raw data will be in columns A–E. The in-
          dependent variable (our candidate predictor) will be in column F; and our
          variable of trading interest—the dependent variable—will reside in column
          G. Save this spreadsheet as Practice Sheet in an Excel folder. We’ll be using
          it for future lessons.
               Note that we downloaded 1,000 days worth of data, but the actual num-
          ber of data points in our sample is 998. We could not compute SP(1) from
          the first data point because we didn’t have the prior day’s close; hence we
          had to begin our formula in the third data row. We also could not compute
          SP+1 from the last data point because we don’t know tomorrow’s closing

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          322                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          price. Thus our analyses can only use 998 of the data points of the 1,000
          that we downloaded. If you want an even 1,000 data points, you’d have to
          download the last 1,002 values.
              With a bit of practice, all of this will become second nature. It will
          take only a minute or two to open your data files, copy and paste the raw
          data, write your formulas, and copy the cells to complete your sheet. In this
          example, we are exploring how the prior day’s return is related to the next
          day’s return. We’re setting the spreadsheet up to ask the question, “Does
          it make sense to buy after an up day/sell after a down day; does it make
          sense to sell after an up day/buy after a down day; or does it make no ap-
          parent difference?” I call the independent variable the candidate predictor,
          because we don’t really know if it is related to our variable of interest. It’s
          also only a candidate because we’re not conducting the statistical signif-
          icance tests that would tell us more conclusively that this is a significant
          predictor. Rather, we’re using the analysis much as we used the charting in
          the prior lesson: as a way to generate hypotheses.


              Remember, in the current examples, we’re using historical rela-
              tionship to describe patterns in markets, not to statistically analyze
              them. We’re generating, not testing, hypotheses.

               If I had been interested in examining the relationship between the prior
          week’s price change with the next week’s return, the spreadsheet would
          look very similar, except the raw data would consist of weekly index data,
          rather than daily. In general, it’s neatest for analysis if you are investigat-
          ing the impact of the prior period’s data on the next period. This ensures
          that all observations are independent; there are no overlapping data.
               To see what I mean, consider investigating the relationship of the
          prior week’s (five-day) price change on the price change over the next five
          trading days utilizing daily market data. Your independent variable in col-
          umn F would now look like “=((E7-E2)/E2)* 100)”—price change over the
          past five days. The dependent variable in column G would be written as
          “=((E12-E7)/E7)* 100”: the next five-day’s price change. Note, however, that
          as you copy those cells down the spreadsheet per the above procedure, that
          each observation at cells F8, F9, F10, and so on and G8, G9, G10, and so
          on, is not completely independent. The prior five-day return overlaps the
          values for F8, F9, and F10, and the prospective five-day return overlaps for
          cells G8, G9, and G10. This will always be the case when you’re using a
          smaller time period for your raw data than the period that you’re investi-
          gating for your independent and dependent variables.
               Inferential statistical tests depend on each observation in the data set
          being independent, so it is not appropriate to include overlapping data

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          323

          when calculating statistical significance. For my purpose of hypothesis
          generation, I am willing to tolerate a degree of overlap, and so will use daily
          data to investigate relationships of up to 20 days in duration—particularly
          if the amount of overlap relative to the size of the entire data set is small.
          I would not, say, investigate the next 200 days’ return using daily data for
          a sample of 1,000 trading days. I wouldn’t have a particular problem using
          the daily data to investigate, for instance, the prior five-day price change
          on the next five-day return with a four-year look-back period.

              Your findings will be most robust if your look-back period (the
              period that you are drawing data from) includes a variety of
              market conditions: rising, falling, range bound, high volatility, low
              volatility, and so on.

              In general, my dependent variable will consist of prospective price
          change, because that is what I’m interested in as a trader. The indepen-
          dent variable(s) will consist of whatever my observations tell me might be
          meaningfully related to prospective price change. Normally, I look at de-
          pendent variables with respect to the next day’s return (to help with day
          trading ideas) and the next week’s return (to help with formulating swing
          hypotheses). If I want a sense of the market’s possible bigger picture, I’ll in-
          vestigate returns over the next 20 trading days. Traders with different time
          frames may use different periods, including intraday. Overall, I’ve found
          the 1 to 20 day framework to be most useful in my investigations.
              Once again, practice makes perfect. I would encourage you to become
          proficient at downloading your data and assembling your spreadsheets into
          variables before you try your hand at the actual historical investigations.
          Your results, after all, will only be as valid as the data you enter and the
          transformations you impose upon the data.


                     COACHING CUE

          Note how, with the Practice Sheet assembled as in the above example, you can
          easily look at the next day’s average returns following opening gaps. Your inde-
          pendent variable would be the opening gap, which would be written as =((b3-
          e2)/e2)* 100 (the diﬀerence between today’s open and yesterday’s close as a
          percentage). The day’s price change would be =((e3-b3)/b3)* 100 (the diﬀer-
          ence between today’s close and today’s open as a percentage). You would need
          to use stock index futures data or ETF data to get an accurate reﬂection of the
          market open; the cash index does not reﬂect accurate opening values, as not
          all stocks open for trading in the ﬁrst minute of the session.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          324                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          LESSON 96: CONDUCT YOUR
          HISTORICAL INVESTIGATIONS

          Once you have your data downloaded and your independent and depen-
          dent variables calculated, you’re ready to take a look at the relationship be-
          tween your two sets of variables. In the last lesson, you saved your spread-
          sheet of the S&P 500 Index data with the prior day’s price change in column
          F and the next day’s change in column G. Open that sheet, and we will get
          started with our investigation.
               Your first step will be to copy the data from the sheet to a fresh work-
          sheet. We will first copy the data to the Windows clipboard, then paste into
          the new sheet. This eliminates all formulas from the sheet, because the
          clipboard saves only alphanumeric text data. This process is necessary for
          the data manipulations that will be required for our investigation.
               So, highlight all the cells in your sheet with the exception of the last
          row (the most recent day’s data). We don’t include that row in our analysis
          because there won’t be any data for the next day’s return. With the cells
          highlighted, click the Excel menu item for Edit, then select Copy. You’ll
          then exit out of the spreadsheet and instruct Windows to save the data to
          the clipboard. Open a fresh, blank sheet; click on cell A1; click the Excel
          menu item for Edit; and select Paste. Your data will be transferred to the
          new sheet, with no formulas included.
               Once you’ve done this, you’ll delete the first row of data below the
          data labels, because there will be no data for the change from the prior
          day. When you delete the row by highlighting the entire row and clicking
          Edit and selecting Delete, the rows below will move up, so that there are
          no empty rows between the data labels and the data themselves.
               You’ll now highlight all the data (including the first row of data labels),
          select the Excel menu item for Data; then select Sort; and select the option
          SP(1) in the Sort By drop down menu. You can click the button on the drop
          down menu for Descending: this will place your largest daily gain in the
          S&P 500 Index in the first row, the next largest in the second row, etc. The
          last row of data will be the day of the largest daily drop in the S&P 500
          Index.


              The Sort function separates your independent variables into high
              and low values, so that you can see how the dependent variables
              are affected.

               Now we’re ready to explore the data. For the purpose of the illus-
          tration, I’ll assume that your data labels are in row 1 and that you have
          999 rows of data (998 days of S&P data plus the row of labels). Below

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         325


          your bottom row in column G (say cell G1002), type in “=average(g2:g500)”
          (without the quotation marks) and hit Enter. In the cell below that (G1003),
          type in “=average(g501:g999)” and hit Enter. This gives you a general sense
          for whether next day returns have been better or worse following the half
          of the days in the sample that were strongest versus the half of days that
          were weakest. Note that you could analyze the next day returns roughly by
          quartiles simply by entering “=average(g2:g250)”; “=average(g251:g500)”;
          “=average(g501:g750)”; and “=average(g751:g999)”.
               What your data will show is that next day returns tend to be most posi-
          tive following weak days in the S&P 500 Index and most restrained follow-
          ing strong days in the Index. How much of a difference makes a difference
          for your trading? As I emphasized earlier in the chapter, I am not using this
          information to establish a statistically significant mechanical trading sys-
          tem. Rather, I’m looking qualitatively for differences that hit me between
          the eyes. These will be the most promising relationships for developing
          trading hypotheses. If the difference between average next day returns
          following an up day and a down day is the difference between a gain of
          0.01 percent and 0.03 percent, I’m not going to get excited. If the average re-
          turns following the strong days are negative and those following the weak
          days are positive, that’s more interesting.


              As you conduct many sortings, you’ll gain a good feel for differ-
              ences that may form the basis for worthwhile hypotheses.

               So how might I use the information? Perhaps I’ll drill down further,
          examine those quartiles, and find that returns are particularly muted fol-
          lowing strong up days. If that’s the case, I will entertain the hypothesis of
          range-bound trading the morning following a strong daily rise in the S&P
          500 Index. If I see that particularly weak days in the S&P 500 Index tend to
          close higher the next day, I may entertain the notion of an intraday rever-
          sal the day following a large drop. The data provide me with a heads up,
          a hypothesis—not a firm, fixed conclusion.
               The data might also help sharpen some of my trading practices. If I’m
          holding positions for intermediate-term swing positions, I might be more
          likely to add to a long position after a daily market dip than after a strong
          daily rise. I might be more likely to take partial profits on a short position
          following toward the end of a weak market day than toward the end of an
          up day.
               And suppose we find no apparent differences whatsoever? This, too,
          is a finding. It would tell us that—at this time frame, for this time
          period—there is no evidence of trend or countertrend effects. This would
          help us temper our expectations following strong and weak market days.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          326                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          We would not assume that trends are our friends; nor would we be tempted
          to fade moves automatically. We would also know to look for potential
          edges elsewhere.


              Keep a record of the relationships that you examine and what you
              find; this will guide future inquiries and prevent you from duplicat-
              ing efforts later on.


               If your analysis does not identify a promising relationship within the
          data, you’re limited only by your own creativity in exploring alternate hy-
          potheses. For instance, you might look at how prior returns affect next
          returns for weekly or monthly data, rather than daily data. You might ex-
          plore next day returns for a different instrument or market. Perhaps you’ll
          see greater evidence of trendiness in commodities or small stocks than in
          the S&P 500 Index.
               Where your creativity can really kick in is in your selection of
          independent variables. The same basic spreadsheet format outlined above
          could be used to examine the relationship between the current day’s
          put-call ratio and the next day’s S&P 500 returns; the current day’s volume
          and next day returns; the current day’s financial sector performance and
          next day S&P 500 returns; the current day’s bond yield performance
          and next day returns. Once you have the spreadsheet analysis process
          mastered, it’s simply a matter of switching one set of variables for another.
          This way, you can investigate a host of candidate hypotheses in a relatively
          short period of time.
               The key to making this work is the Sort command in Excel. This sorts
          your independent variable from high to low or low to high so that you can
          see what happens in your dependent variable as a result. Along with visu-
          alizing data in charts, sorting is a great way to get a feel for how variables
          may be related, highlighting important market themes. But save your orig-
          inal spreadsheet with the formulas—the one you had titled Practice Sheet
          in the previous lesson. We’re not finished with Excel tricks!


                     COACHING CUE

          Here is one fruitful line of investigation: Take a look at next day returns as a
          function of weak up days versus strong up days. You can deﬁne weak versus
          strong with indicators such as the daily advance/decline ratio or the ratio of up
          volume to down volume. Limit your sort to the rising days in the sample and sort
          those based on market strength. What you’ll ﬁnd for some markets is that very
          strong markets tend to continue their strength in the near term; weaker rising

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                         327

          markets are more likely to reverse direction. Later, you can limit your sorting
          to the declining days and sort them by very weak and less weak markets. Many
          times, the patterns you see among the rising days are diﬀerent from those that
          show up among the falling days.




          LESSON 97: CODE THE DATA

          Sometimes the independent variable you’re interested in is a categori-
          cal variable, not a set of continuous values. If I wanted to investigate
          the relationship between a person’s weight (independent variable) and
          their lung capacity (dependent variable), all of my data would be contin-
          uous. If, however, I wanted to investigate the relationship between gender
          (male/female) and lung capacity, I would now be looking at a categorical
          variable in relationship to a continuous one. Conversely, if I wanted to sim-
          ply identify whether a person had normal versus subnormal lung capacity,
          I would wind up with a categorical breakdown for my dependent variable.
               There are times in market analysis when we want to look at the
          data categorically, rather than in a continuous fashion. In my own in-
          vestigations, I routinely combine categorical views with continuous ones.
          Here’s why:
               If you reopen the spreadsheet we created, Practice Sheet, that exam-
          ined current day returns in the S&P 500 Index as a function of the previous
          day’s performance, you’ll see that we had Date data in column A; open-high-
          low-close data in columns B–E; the present day’s price change in column
          F; and the next day’s price change in column G. For the analysis in the last
          lesson, we sorted the data based upon the present day’s price change and
          then examined the average price change for the next day as a function of
          strong versus weak days. Our dependent measure, next day’s price change,
          was continuous, and we compared average values to get a sense for the
          relationship between the independent and dependent variables.
               Averages, however, can be misleading: a few extreme values can skew
          the result. These outliers can make the differences between two sets of av-
          erages look much larger than they really are. We can eliminate this possi-
          ble source of bias by changing our dependent variable. We’ll keep the next
          day’s price change in column G, but now will add a dummy-coded variable
          in column H. This code will simply tell us whether the price change in col-
          umn G is up or down. Thus, in cell H2, I would type in (without quotation
          marks): “=if(G2>0,1,0)” and hit Enter. This instructs the cell at H2 to re-
          turn a “1” if the price change in cell G2 is positive; anything else—a zero or
          negative return—will return a “0.” I will then click on H2; click the Excel
          menu item for Edit; click Copy; click cell H3 and drag all the way down the

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          328                                                  THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          length of the data; and then click Enter. The 0,1 dummy code will populate
          each of the column H cells.


              We want to know whether the independent variable is associated
              with greater frequency of up/down days, as well as the magnitudes
              of change across those days.

               Now we go through the same sorting procedure described in the previ-
          ous lesson. We highlight all the cells in the worksheet—including the new
          column H—and click Edit and Copy. We exit the spreadsheet, instructing
          Excel to save changes and to save the highlighted data. We open a new
          sheet; click Edit; click Paste; and all the spreadsheet data—again minus
          the formulas—will appear on the sheet. Once again we sort the data by
          column F (current day’s price change) in descending order, as described
          in the previous lesson. Again we divide the data in half and, below the
          last entry in column G, we type in “=average(g2:g500)” and, below that,
          “=average(g501:g999).”
               This, as noted in the previous lesson, shows us the magnitude of the
          average differences in next day’s returns when the current day is relatively
          strong (top half of price change) versus relatively weak (bottom half of the
          price change distribution).
               In column H, next to the cells for the two averages in column G, we
          enter the formula “=sum(H2:H500)” and, below that, “=sum(H501:H999).”
          This tells us how many up days occurred following relatively strong days
          in the market and how many up days occurred following relatively weak
          days. Because we’re splitting the data in half, we should see roughly equal
          numbers of up days in the two sums if the current day’s performance is
          not strongly related to the next day’s price change. On the other hand, if
          we see considerably fewer up days following the strong market days than
          following the weak ones, we might begin to entertain a hypothesis.
               If the average next day changes in column G look quite discrepant, but
          the number of winning days in the two conditions in column G are similar,
          that means that the odds of a winning day may not be significantly affected
          by the prior day’s return, but the size of that day might be affected. In
          general, I like to see clear differences in both criteria. Thus, if the average
          size of the next day’s return are higher following a falling day than a rising
          one and the odds of a rising day are higher, I’ll be most likely to use the
          observation to frame a possible market hypothesis.
               Note that we can dummy code independent variables as well. If, for
          example, I wanted to see whether an up or down day (independent vari-
          able) tended to be followed by an up or down day (dependent variable), I
          could code column F (current day’s price change) with a code as above in
          column H and also code column G (next day’s price change) identically in

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          329

          column I. I would then copy the spreadsheet to a fresh sheet and sort the
          data based on column H, so that we’d separate the 1s from the 0s. We’d
          then examine the column I sum for the cells in column H that were 1s and
          compare with the column I sum for the cells in column H that were 0s.
               Dummy coding is especially helpful if we want to examine the impact
          of events on prospective returns. For instance, we could code all Mondays
          with a 1; all Tuesdays with a 2, etc., and then sort the next day’s return
          based on the codings to tell us whether returns were more or less favorable
          following particular days of the week. Coding is also useful when we want
          to set up complex conditions among two or more independent variables
          and examine their relationship to future returns. This kind of coding gets a
          bit more complex and will form the basis for the next lesson.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you include volume in your spreadsheet, you can code days with rising volume
          with a 1 and days with falling volume with a 0. This would then allow you to
          compare next day returns as a function of whether today’s rise or decline were
          on rising or falling volume. All you’d need to do is sort the data once based on
          the current day’s price change and then a second time separately for the rising
          and falling occasions as a function of the rising and declining volume.




          LESSON 98: EXAMINE CONTEXT

          Philosopher Stephen Pepper coined the term contextualism to describe a
          worldview in which truth is a function of the context in which knowledge
          is embedded. A short-term price pattern might have one set of expectations
          in a larger bull market; quite another under bear conditions. A short-term
          reversal in the first hour of trading has different implications than one that
          occurs midday. To use an example from The Psychology of Trading, you
          understand Bear right! one way on the highway, quite another way in the
          Alaskan wilderness.
               We can code market data for contexts and then investigate patterns
          specific to those contexts. What we’re really asking is, “Under the set of
          conditions that we find at present, what is the distribution of future expec-
          tations?” We’re not pretending that these will be universal expectations.
          Rather, they are contextual—applicable to our current situation.

              Many of the most fruitful trading hypotheses pertain to certain
              kinds of markets—not to all markets, all the time.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          330                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



               Let’s retrieve the Practice Sheet historical daily data for the S&P 500 In-
          dex that we used in our previous lessons. To refresh memory: Column A in
          our spreadsheet consists of the Date; columns B through E are open-high-
          low-close data. Column F is the independent variable, the current day’s
          price change; entered into cell F22, it would be: “=((F22-F21)/F21)* 100.”
          Column G will serve as our contextual variable. In G22, we enter the
          following:

                                = if(E22>average(E3:E21),1,0)

               This will return to cell G23 a “1” if the current price is above the prior
          day’s simple 20-day moving average for the S&P 500 Index; a “0” if it is not
          above the average. The data label for cell G1 might be MA. Our dependent
          measure will be the next day’s price change. In cell H22, this would be
          “=((E23-E22)/E22)* 100” and H1 would have the label SP+1.
               To complete the sheet, we would highlight cell G22 and H22; click the
          Excel menu item for Edit; click Copy; highlight the cells below G23 for
          the full length of the data set; and hit Enter. We highlight and copy all the
          data in the sheet as before; save the sheet as Practice Sheet2; and instruct
          Windows to save the data to the clipboard for another application. We open
          a fresh spreadsheet; click on cell A1; click the Excel menu item for Edit;
          select Paste; and our sheet now fills with text data. Note that, in this case,
          we’ll have to eliminate rows 2 to 21, since they don’t have a value for the 20-
          day moving average. We’ll also eliminate the last row of data, because there
          are no data for the next day. You eliminate a row simply by highlighting
          the letter(s) for the row(s) at left; clicking the Excel menu item for Edit;
          selecting Delete. The row will disappear and the remaining data below will
          move into place.

              Note that using a moving average as a variable of interest reduces
              the size of your data set, since the initial values will not have a mov-
              ing average calculated. You need to take this into account when
              determining your desired sample size.

               We now double sort the data to perform the contextual investigation.
          Let’s say that we’re interested in the expectations following a rising day
          in a market that is trading above versus below its 20-day moving average.
          We sort the data based on column F “SP(1)” as we did in our previous
          lesson, performing the sort on a Descending basis, so that the largest and
          positive price changes appear at the top of the sheet. Now we select only
          the data for the cells that show positive price change and copy those to
          another sheet. Our second sort will be based on column G (MA), again
          on a Descending Basis. This will separate the up days in markets trading
          above their 20-day moving average (those coded “1”) from all other days.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                        331


          As before, we’ll examine the average next day’s return by calculating the
          average for the cells in column H that are coded in column G as “1” and
          comparing that to the average for the cells in column H that are coded in
          column G as “0.”
               Thus, let’s say that there are 538 cells for up days; 383 of these
          are coded “1” in column G and 155 are coded “0.” You would compare
          “=average(H2:H384)” and “=average(H385:H539).” You could also code
          the cells in column H as either “1” or “0” in column I based on whether
          they are up or down “=if(H2>0,1,0)” and then compare “=sum(I2:I384)”
          and “=sum(I385:I539)” to see if there are notable differences in the num-
          ber of up days following up days in markets that are above and below their
          moving averages.
               Just for your curiosity, using cash S&P 500 data as the raw data, I found
          that the average next day change following an up day when we’re above the
          20-day moving average to be −0.04 percent; the average next day change
          following an up day when we’re below the 20-day moving average was
          −0.18 percent. This is a good example of a finding that doesn’t knock my
          socks off, but is suggestive. I would want to conduct other investigations of
          what happens after rising days in falling markets before generating trading
          hypotheses that would have me shorting strength in a broader downtrend.


              Many times you’ll see differences in the sorted data that are strong
              enough to warrant further investigation, but not strong enough to
              justify a trading hypothesis by itself.

               This combination of coding and sorting can create a variety of contex-
          tual views of markets. For example, if we type in, “=if(E21=max(E2:E21),
          1,0)” we can examine the context in which the current day is the highest
          price in the past 20 and see how that influences returns. If we include a
          second independent variable, such as the number of stocks making new
          52-week highs and lows, we can examine how markets behave when new
          highs exceed new lows versus when new lows exceed new highs. For in-
          stance, if new highs go into column F and new lows into column G, we
          can code for “=if(F21>G21,1,0” in column H, place our dependent mea-
          sure (perhaps the next day’s price change) in column I and sort based on
          the new high/low coding.
               As mentioned earlier, it is wise to not create too many contextual con-
          ditions, because you will wind up with a very small sample of occasions
          that fit your query, and generalization will be difficult. If you obtain fewer
          than 20 occasions that meet your criteria, you may need to relax those cri-
          teria or include fewer of them.
               As your own trading coach, you can utilize these contextual queries to
          see how markets behave under a variety of conditions. The movement of

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          332                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          sectors, related asset classes—anything can be a context that affects recent
          market behavior. In exploring these patterns, you become more sensitive
          to them in real-time, aiding your selection and execution of trades.


                     COACHING CUE

          If you’re interested in longer-term trading or investing, you can create spread-
          sheets with weekly or monthly data and investigate independent variables such
          as monthly returns on the next month’s returns; VIX levels on the next month’s
          volatility; sentiment data on the next month’s returns; price changes in oil on
          the next month’s returns, etc. You can also code data for months of the year
          (or beginning/end of the month) to investigate calendar eﬀects on returns.




          LESSON 99: FILTER DATA

          Let’s say you want to analyze intraday information for the S&P 500 Index
          futures. Now your spreadsheet will look different as you download data
          from sources such as your real-time charting application. Your first col-
          umn will be date, your second column will be time of day, and your next
          columns will be open, high, low, and closing prices. If you so select, the
          next column can be trading volume for that time period (one-minute, five-
          minute, hourly, and so on).
              Suppose you want to see how the S&P 500 market has behaved at a
          certain time of day. What we will need to do is filter out that time of day
          from the mass of downloaded data and only examine that subset. Instead of
          sorting data, which has been a mainstay of our investigations to this point,
          we will use Excel’s filter function.
              To illustrate how we might do this, we’ll start with a simple question.
          Suppose we want to know how trading volume for the current first half-
          hour of trading compares with the average trading volume for that cor-
          responding half-hour over the prior 20 days of trading. This will give us
          a rough sense of market activity, which correlates positively with price
          volatility. The volume also gives a relative sense for the participation of
          large, institutional traders. If, say, we observe a break out of a range during
          the first 30 minutes of trading, it is helpful to know whether or not these
          large market-moving participants are on board.


              Volume analyses can help you identify who is in the market.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          333


               For this investigation, we’ll examine half-hourly data for the S&P 500
          emini contract. I obtain my intraday data from my quote platforms; in the
          current example, I’ll use e-Signal. To do this, we create a 30-minute chart
          of the ES futures contract; click on the chart and scroll to the right to move
          the chart backward in time. When we’ve covered the last 20 days or so,
          we click on the menu item Tools; select Data Export; then uncheck the
          boxes for the data that we won’t need. In this case, all we’ll need is Date,
          Time, and Volume. We click the button for Copy to Clipboard and open a
          fresh sheet in Excel. Once we click on the Excel menu item for Edit and
          select Paste, with the cursor at cell A2, we’ll populate the sheet with the
          intraday data. We can then enter names for the columns in row 1: Date;
          Time; and Volume. (If you’re downloading from e-Signal, those names will
          accompany the data and you can download the data with the cursor at A1).
               Our next step is to highlight the entire data set that we want to cover.
          We click on the Excel menu item for Data; select Filter; and select AutoFil-
          ter. A set of small arrows will appear beside the column names. Click the
          arrow next to Time and, from the drop down menu, select the time that rep-
          resents the start of the trading day. In my case, living in the Chicago area in
          Central Time, that would be 8:30 A . M . You’ll then see all the volume figures
          for the half-hour 8:30 A . M . to 9:00 A . M . Click on Edit; select Copy; open a
          blank sheet; click on Edit; and select Paste. This will put the 8:30 A . M . data
          on a separate sheet. If you have 20 values (the past 20 days), you can enter
          the formula “=average(c2:c21)” and you’ll see the average trading volume
          for the first half-hour of trading. Of course, you can filter for any time of
          day and see that half-hour’s average volume as well.


              When you know the average trading volume for a particular
              time period, you can assess institutional participation in real
              time—particularly with respect to whether this volume picks up
              or slows down as a function of market direction.

               The filter function is helpful when you want to pull out data selectively
          from a data set. Let’s say, for instance, that you had a column in which you
          coded Mondays as 1; Tuesday’s as 2; etc. You could then filter out the 1s
          in the historical data set and see how the market behaved specifically on
          Mondays. Similarly, you could code the first or last days of the month and
          filter the data to observe the returns associated with those.
               In general, I find filtering most helpful for intraday analyses, when I
          want to see how markets behave at a particular time of day under particu-
          lar conditions. Frankly, however, this is not where I find the greatest edges
          typically, and it’s not where I’d recommend that a beginner start with
          historical investigations. Should you become serious about investigating

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          334                                                   THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          such intraday patterns, I strongly recommend obtaining a clean database
          from a vendor such as Tick Data. You can use their data management soft-
          ware to create data points at any periodicity and download these easily to
          Excel. Serious, longer-term investigations of historical intraday data need
          tools far stronger than Excel. Limits to the size of spreadsheets and the
          ease of maneuvering them make it impossible to use Excel for long-term
          investigations of high frequency data.
               Still, when you want to see how markets behave in the short run—say,
          in the first hour of trading after a large gap open—investigations with in-
          traday data and filtering can be quite useful. You’ll find interesting patterns
          of continuation and reversal to set up day-trading ideas or to help with the
          execution of longer timeframe trades.


                     COACHING CUE

          Filtering can be useful for examining patterns of returns as a function of time
          of day. For instance, say the market is down over the past two hours: how do
          returns compare if those two hours are the ﬁrst versus the last two hours of the
          day? How are returns over the next few hours impacted if the day prior to those
          two hours was down? Such analyses can be very helpful for intraday traders,
          particularly when you combine price change independent variables with such
          intraday predictors as NYSE TICK.




          LESSON 100: MAKE USE OF
          YOUR FINDINGS

          This chapter has provided only a sampling of the kinds of ways that you
          can use simple spreadsheets and formulas to investigate possible patterns
          in historical data. Remember: these are qualitative looks at the data; they
          are designed to generate hypotheses, not prove them. Manipulating data
          and looking at them from various angles is a skill just like executing trades.
          With practice and experience, you can get to the point where you investi-
          gate quite a few patterns all in the hour or two after market close or before
          they open.
              The key is to identify what makes the current market unique or dis-
          tinctive. Are we well below or above a moving average? Have there been
          many more new lows than highs or the reverse? Has one sector been un-
          usually strong or weak? Have the previous days been strong or weak? It
          is often at the extremes—when indicators or patterns are at their most
          unusual—that we find the greatest potential edges. But sometimes those

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008     13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                          335

          unique elements are hard to find. Very high or low volume; strong or weak
          put/call ratios; large opening gaps—all are good areas for investigations.


              We find the greatest directional edges following extreme market
              events.

               Once you have identified a pattern that stands out, this becomes a hy-
          pothesis that you entertain to start a trading day or week. If, say, I find that
          40 of the last 50 occasions in which the market has been very weak with
          a high put/call ratio have shown higher prices 20 days later, this will have
          me looking for a near-term bottoming process. If, after that analysis, I no-
          tice that we’re making lower price lows but with fewer stocks and sectors
          participating in the weakness, this may add a measure of weight to my hy-
          pothesis. Eventually, I might get to the point where I think we’ve put in a
          price bottom and I’ll buy the market, giving myself a favorable risk/reward
          should the historical pattern play out.
               But equally important, consider the scenario in which we see good his-
          torical odds of bouncing over a 20-day period, leading us to search for
          a near-term bottoming process. My fresh data, however, suggest that the
          market is weakening further: more stocks and sectors are making lows,
          not fewer. The historical pattern does not appear to be playing itself out.
          This, too, is very useful data. When markets buck their historical tenden-
          cies, something special may be at work. Some very good trades can pro-
          ceed from the recognition that markets are not behaving normally.
               This is the value of considering patterns as hypotheses and keeping
          your mind open to those hypotheses being supported or not. A historical
          pattern in markets is a kind of script for the market to follow; your job is
          to determine whether or not it’s following that script.


              Our analyses only inform us of historical tendencies. If a market
              is not behaving in a manner that is consistent with its history, this
              alerts us to unique, situational forces at work.


              All of this suggests that historical investigations are useful logical aids,
          but my experience is that their greatest value may be psychological. Day
          after day, week after week, and year after year of investigating patterns
          and running market results through Excel have given me a unique feel for
          patterns. It also has given me a keen sense for when patterns are changing:
          when historical precedents may no longer hold.
              One routine that has been very helpful has been to isolate the last five
          or so instances of a potential pattern. If the market has behaved quite

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      13:21     Printer: Yet to come




          336                                                    THE DAILY TRADING COACH



          differently in the last several instances than it has historically, I enter-
          tain the possibility that we’re seeing a shift in market patterns. If I see
          the last few instances behaving abnormally across many different variables
          and time frames, those anomalies strengthen my sense of a market shift.
               When I see how results have played out over the years, I become a less
          naı̈ve trend follower. I don’t automatically assume that rising markets will
          continue to skyrocket or that falling markets will continue to plunge. I’ve
          developed tools for determining when trending markets are gaining and
          losing steam; these have been helpful in anticipating reversals. Seeing how
          these indicators behave under various market conditions over time—and
          actually quantifying their track record—has provided me with a measure
          of confidence in the ideas that I would not have in the absence of intimacy
          with the data.
               Much of the edge in trading comes from seeing markets in unique ways,
          catching moves before they occur or early in their appearance. It is easy to
          become fixed in our views, with vision narrowed by looking at too few
          markets and patterns. As your own trading coach, you need to keep your
          mind open and fresh. Read, talk with experienced traders, follow a range
          of markets closely, test patterns historically, and know what’s happening
          globally: you’ll see things that never register on the radar of the average
          trader. You’ll be at your most creative when you have the broadest vision.


                     COACHING CUE

          When you examine historical patterns, go into your data set and speciﬁcally
          examine the returns from the occasions that didn’t ﬁt into the pattern. This will
          give you an idea of the kind of drawdowns you could expect if you were to trade
          the pattern mechanically. Many times, the exceptions to patterns end up being
          large moves; for instance, most occasions may show a countertrend tendency
          with a relative handful of very large trending moves. If you know this, you can
          look for those possible exceptions, study them, and maybe even identify and
          proﬁt from them.




          RESOURCES

          The Become Your Own Trading Coach blog is the primary supplemental
          resource for this book. You can find links and additional posts on the
          topic of coaching processes at the home page on the blog for Chapter 10:
          http:// becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com / 2008 / 08 / daily-trading-
          coach-chapter-ten-links.html

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008    13:21    Printer: Yet to come




          Looking for the Edge                                                        337

               My own interest in historical patterns owes a great deal to the work of
          Victor Niederhoffer. His Daily Speculations web site is a source of many
          testable ideas regarding market movements:
          www.dailyspeculations.com
               Henry Carstens’ online resource, An Introduction to Testing Trading
          Ideas, is a worthwhile and popular resource:
          www.verticalsolutions.com/books.html
               Mike Bryant’s trading systems work is quite good; here’s a collection
          of free downloads from his site:
          www.breakoutfutures.com/PreDownload.htm
               Rob Hanna’s blog tests a number of historical trading patterns and is a
          great stimulus for your own research:
          www.quantifiableedges.blogspot.com
               Two subscription services that do a fine job of testing trading ideas are
          the SentimenTrader site from Jason Goepfert (www.sentimentrader.com)
          and the Market Tells letter from Rennie Yang (www.markettells.com).
               Henry, Rob, Jason, and Rennie all contributed segments to Chapter 9
          of this book, offering insights into the relevance of testing ideas for self-
          coaching.

P1: JYS
c10     JWBT039-Steenbarger   December 29, 2008   13:21   Printer: Yet to come




                                            338

P1: JYS
conc    JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 29, 2008      14:18     Printer: Yet to come




                                Conclusion
                    Science strives to achieve unity of fact. Art strives to
                    achieve unity of feeling.
                                                        —Stephen Pepper




         This is our final lesson; let’s see if we can achieve a bit of unity of feeling
         as well as fact.



         LESSON 101: FIND YOUR PATH

         My mother, Constance Steenbarger, passed away last year. She was an
         artist and an art teacher. Her greatest work of art, however, was her family.
         She provided her children—and her husband—with the one, irreplaceable
         psychological gift: the knowledge and the feeling that they were special.
         It’s amazing how much you can achieve when you know that you’re not or-
         dinary. Out of that awareness, you’re unwilling to settle for average in your
         work, your relationships, or your returns from markets. When you create a
         work of art out of your family, you empower human beings to want to make
         works of art of their lives. What greater accomplishment could there be?
         If I can achieve, as a psychologist and parent, a bit of what Connie Steen-
         barger accomplished with her family, it will count more than any degree
         after my name, any great trade I might place.
              But isn’t that what becoming your own coach is all about? It doesn’t
         matter if the focus is trading, sales, parenting, or athletics: the goal is
         to make a work of art of your life by becoming the best you can poss-
         ibly be.
              The great disease that afflicts most people is their inability to think
         greatly of themselves. It’s not about narcissism (which reflects an absence
         of self, not authentic greatness), and it’s not about new-age self-esteem
         palliatives. Rather, thinking greatly of oneself is charting a path in life that
         makes a difference. It’s living a goal-oriented life, not a life of drifting from
         day to day. It’s remaining true to values and purposes, so that life has worth

                                                                                     339

P1: JYS
conc    JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008      14:18    Printer: Yet to come




         340                                                                CONCLUSION



         and meaning. It’s about making such a profound impact that someone,
         somewhere will want to conclude their book with a dedication to you.


             Your life is a partially finished work of art.

              There’s an old saw that we tend to marry people like our parents. In my
         younger days, I would have been horrified at the prospect. Looking back on
         my mother’s impact on her family and my wife Margie’s impact on hers, I
         know that the rule holds true for me. Margie’s greatest talent is that she is
         secure enough within herself to help others feel special about themselves.
         When one of our children went through a difficult marriage, I never once
         worried. I knew that she would eventually find happiness, because she had
         the experience of being special to her mother. When you have that deep
         feeling of not being ordinary, you ultimately gravitate toward the best
         within you, the best for you.
              If you are going to be successful as your own coach, you will need to
         be like Connie and Margie; you’ll need to sustain a relationship with your-
         self in which you are always special, no matter how daunting immediate
         obstacles may seem. You’ll need to focus on your successes every bit as
         much—if not more—than your failures. You’ll need to structure specific
         goals and concrete activities designed to achieve those, so that every day is
         an affirmation of drive and competence. Self-coaching is not about keeping
         journals or tracking your profits and losses. It’s about forging a relationship
         with yourself that is as empowering as a mother’s with a family.
              At the end of all of this, you may decide that trading is not your path
         in life. Have the courage to embrace that and find the work that truly cap-
         tures who you are and what you do best. I love trading—the intellectual
         challenge, the endless opportunities for improvement, and the immediacy
         of the feedback. You know when you’ve done well; you know when you’ve
         let yourself down. While trading has made me money, it’s not truly what
         I do best. I once tried to be a full-time trader and quickly felt a large hole
         in my life where psychology—and working with people—had vanished. So
         now I trade markets on the side, work as a coach to professional traders,
         apply my greatest interests and talents in the most challenging settings,
         and write books that maybe, just maybe, will help others find what is spe-
         cial within them.

             Let your strengths define your path.

            Know what you do best. Build on strengths. Never stop working on
         yourself. Never stop improving. Every so often, upset the apple cart and

P1: JYS
conc    JWBT039-Steenbarger     December 29, 2008     14:18    Printer: Yet to come




         Conclusion                                                               341


         pursue wholly new challenges. The enemy of greatness is not evil; it’s medi-
         ocrity. Don’t settle for the mediocre. You don’t have to be an artist and art
         teacher to make a work of art out of your life. And if trading is your path,
         learn from those who have blazed the trail ahead of you. Your final assign-
         ment is to absorb the resources from the various chapters of this book and
         select the few that will best support your self-coaching. They will provide
         the brushes and paint with which you’ll create your life’s artwork.



         FOR MORE ON SELF-COACHING

         The contributors to Chapter 9 have assembled their own mentoring
         resources, all linked on the Trading Coach site: http://becomeyourown
         tradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/08/ contributors-to-daily-trading-coach.
         html
              My latest project is a free electronic book on trading theory and
         technique entitled Introduction to Trading that I am writing one blog
         post at a time: http://becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com/2008/09/
         introduction-to-trading.html
              The TraderFeed blog covers a range of topics, from the psychology of
         traders to the psychology of markets: www.traderfeed.blogspot.com
              I’ll be adding coaching resources to the Trading Coach site over
         time; if you have questions or particular interests, by all means feel
         free to leave a question or comment on one of the blog posts: http://
         becomeyourowntradingcoach.blogspot.com. Also feel free to contact me
         at the e-mail address specific to this book: coachingself@aol.com
              For my books on trading psychology and trader performance, as well
         as related materials, check out the Amazon site: www.amazon.com/s/ref =
         nb ss b ? url = search - alias%3Dstripbooks&field - keywords= Brett + Steen
         barger&x=8&y=18

P1: JYS
conc    JWBT039-Steenbarger   December 29, 2008   14:18   Printer: Yet to come




                                           342

P1: JYS
ata     JWBT039-Steenbarger    December 28, 2008      7:43    Printer: Yet to come




                       About the Author


                 rett N. Steenbarger, PhD is clinical associate professor of psychia-

         B       try and behavioral sciences at State University of New York Upstate
                 Medical University in Syracuse, NY. As a clinical psychologist, Dr.
          Steenbarger has co-authored a training text and written numerous book
          chapters and peer-reviewed journal articles on the topic of brief therapy.
          Dr. Steenbarger has traded equity markets since the late 1970s; he works as
          a trading coach for hedge funds, investment banks, and proprietary trading
          firms in the U.S., U.K., and Asia. He is also the author of two books on trad-
          ing psychology (The Psychology of Trading, John Wiley, 2003; Enhancing
          Trader Performance, John Wiley, 2006), and writes a daily blog on trader
          and market psychology (www.traderfeed.blogspot.com).




                                                                                     343

P1: JYS
ata     JWBT039-Steenbarger   December 28, 2008   7:43   Printer: Yet to come




                                            344

P1: JYS
ind     JWBT039-Steenbarger      December 24, 2008      14:6     Printer: Yet to come




                                           Index


          A Dash of Insight blog, 286                brief therapy, 94, 100, 103
          acceptance, 10–11                          burnout, 50, 76
          addiction, 75                              business plans, 228–234, 273
          Adler, David, 240, 300, 303–305
          Afraid to Trade blog, 275                  Carstens, Henry, 232, 248, 261–264, 289
          Alcoholics Anonymous, 30, 142,             Carter, John, 149
              148–149, 170                           catastrophizing, 56, 167–168, 225
          Alpha Trends blog, 275                     change, 4–32
          anxiety, 211, 300                            emotion in, 5
          Aronson, David, 308                          environment and, 12–14
          automatic thoughts, 165–166, 170–171,        focused, 30
              173–174, 176, 182, 185–188               readiness for, 29–30
                                                       routine and, 12–14
          Bandura, Albert, 202                       chart review, 124–125
          Barchart.com, 320                          cognitive coaching techniques,
          Barros, Ray, 290–293                            163–194. See also schemas.
          behavioral coaching, 195–226                 challenging thought patterns,
            conditioning and, 207–210                     182–187
            contingencies and, 196–201. See also       cognitive journal, 172–176, 185–188,
               reinforcement                              191–193
            exposure, 217–223                          disrupting thought patterns, 176–179
            incompatible states and, 211–214           emotion in, 167–169
            positive associations and,                 experiments, 188–190
               214–217                                 imagery and, 182–185
            shaping and, 204–207                       positive thought patterns and,
            social learning and, 201–204                  190–193
            worry and, 223–226                         reframing, 179–182
          Become Your Own Trading Coach              collaboration, 263
               blog, xiv, 32, 64–65, 97, 130, 161,   communication, 293, 300
               193, 226, 259, 305, 336, 341          concentration, 77, 84, 118, 199, 222, 224
          Bellafiore, Mike, 295–297                  conditioning, 207–211, 223
          biofeedback, 16, 84–85, 221, 300           confidence, 54, 91–94, 125, 273, 290
          boredom, 83, 211                           contextualism, 329
          breathing, 5–6, 17, 211–212, 222,          contingencies, 196–201
               296–297                               Cooper, Jeff, 287


                                                                                        345

P1: JYS
ind     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 24, 2008      14:6     Printer: Yet to come




          346                                                                              INDEX


          coping, 44, 95–97, 127, 133, 135, 138,        niche and, 59–60
              151, 156, 225                             perception and, 41
          core competencies, 261–263                    positive, 68–71
          core needs, 136–137                           psychodynamic coaching and,
          corrective emotional experiences,                151–152, 156,
              157–159                                   repetitive patterns of, 135–137,
          correlations of returns, 244–247, 256            140
          creativity, 80, 261–264                       states, 115, 119
          Csikszentmihalyi, Mihalyi, 73, 80             transforming, 14–17
          Czirnich, Chris, 264–270                    energy, 77–79, 199
                                                      Excel, 64, 247, 288, 307–336
          Dalton, Jim, 149                              basics, 313–317
          defenses, 133, 137–141, 150, 157–158,         coding data in, 327–328
               160                                      sorting data in, 324–327
          despair, 48–51                                visualizing data in, 317–320
          Decision Point, 320                         execution, 236, 250–253, 259, 284
          Devon Principle, 18                         expectations, 37–39
          discipline, 62, 120, 180, 209, 265,         expertise development, 159
               272–273, 281, 285, 289–293             exposure, 217–223, 225
          discrepancy, 11, 156–158                    external observer, 265
          diversification, 51, 76, 120, 233–236,
               243–247, 254                           fatigue, 166, 199–210, 300
            psychological, 51, 76                     fear, 51–54, 156–157, 171, 218, 225
          Douglas, Mark, 274                          Fisher, Larry, 295, 298–300
          Dow TICK (TICKI), 247                       flow, 73, 80–81. See also zone
          drawdowns, 87, 125, 249–250, 336            forecasting P/L, 232–233, 248–250
          Duryea, Bill, 149                           Forman, John, 290, 293–295
          Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE),                Frankl, Viktor, 86
               317                                    frustration, 117, 128, 134, 150, 175, 207,
                                                           215, 219, 223
          e-Signal, 312, 314–315
          Edenbridge, 216                             generalization, 208
          ego alien, 141                              Globetrader blog, 264
          elitetrader.com, 150                        goals, 5–9, 19–20, 39, 50, 109–112, 117,
          emotion, 14–17, 20–22, 41, 52–54,               122–123, 147, 231, 294–295
               59–60, 68–71, 115, 119, 129,             emotion in, 5–7
               135–137, 140, 151–152, 156,              process, 110–111
               167–169, 178, 181, 187–188, 197,       Goepfert, Jason, 280–282, 310
               199, 201, 208–210, 214, 225,           Goldberg, Elkonon, 80
               281–282, 298–299. See also mood.       greatness, 339–340
             changing, 20–22                          Gurdjieff, G. I., 80, 170, 195
             behavioral coaching and, 197, 199,
               201, 208–210, 214, 225                 habit, 176, 189
             cognitive coaching and, 167–169,         Hanna, Rob, 286–288, 310
               178, 181, 187–188                      happiness, 71–73
             fear, 51–54                              Harnett, Trevor, 271–273
             imagery and, 129                         hate, 142
             journaling and, 281–282, 298             honesty, 291

P1: JYS
ind     JWBT039-Steenbarger       December 24, 2008      14:6     Printer: Yet to come




          Index                                                                           347

          imagery, 126–129, 181–185, 195, 214,          repetitive, 133, 135–138, 170
               218–220, 222–223. See also               solution, 104, 111–114, 227–236
               visualization                            thinking, 167–193. See also schemas
          Institute of Auction Market Theory,         Pennebaker, James, 11, 15
               149                                    Pepper, Stephen, 329, 339
          integrity, 89–91                            perception, 20–22, 41, 51
          intentionality, 77, 79–82                     emotion and, 20–22
          intuition, 83–84                              fear and, 51
                                                      performance anxiety, 54–58, 75,
          Kirk, Charles, 275, 279–281                      202
                                                      Perruna, Chris, 283–285
          lbrgroup.com, 149                           personality, 14
          Liberman, Terry, 149                        physical tension, 150–152
          Luborsky, Lester, 132                       Piaget, Jean, 164
                                                      Pinnacle Data, 312, 314–315
          Mabe, Dave, 283–284                         play, 81–82
          Market Delta, 43, 150, 258, 271             position size, 35, 53, 62, 120, 124, 229,
          Market Profile, 255, 278                         270, 283, 292
          Market Tells, 300                           positive psychology, 67
          Marketsinprofile.com, 149                   positive thinking, 190–193
          Maslow, Abraham, 73, 207                    pressing, 45–48
          meditation, 22–23                           price targets, 62, 92
          Meichenbaum, Donald, 127                    procrastination, 143–144, 200, 216
          mental checklist, 276–277                   proprietary trading, 204, 213, 221,
          Miller, Jeff, 286, 288–290                       295–300
          mirroring, 17–20, 24–25, 148, 159           psychodynamic coaching, 131–161
          mood, 61–64, 68, 199. See also emotion        challenging defenses, 138–141
          motivation, 49–50, 107–109, 112, 123,         coaching relationship and,
               147, 171, 199–200, 216                      144–147
            suppression of, 49–50                       discomfort and, 150–152
                                                        discrepancy and, 156–158
          niche. See trading niche                      emotion and 141–144
          Niederhoffer, Victor, 254                     past relationships and 132–135
          novelty, 180                                  positive relationships, 147–150
          NYSE TICK, 43, 52, 192, 247, 253,             repetitive patterns, 135–138
              257–258, 302–303, 312                     transference and, 153–155
                                                        working through, 158–161
          O’Neil, William, 287
          overconfidence, 163, 165, 171, 175, 223,    qualitative data, 309
              300                                     Quantifiable Edges blog, 286

          patterns of behavior, 104–118, 121,         Rand, Ayn, 37, 89
               133–138, 141–144, 154, 156–158,        Raschke, Linda Bradford, 149, 291
               170, 199, 201, 215–217, 220,           Real Tick, 312
               227–236, 276, 279, 302                 reframing, 179–184
            extinguishing, 215–217, 220               reinforcement, 196–200, 202–207,
            problem, 104, 110, 114–117, 141–144,           214–216, 220, 224
               156–158, 199                           relapse, 5, 30, 121

P1: JYS
ind     JWBT039-Steenbarger        December 24, 2008      14:6     Printer: Yet to come




          348                                                                              INDEX


          relationships, 7–8, 132–136, 144–150,        shaping, 204–207, 217
                340                                    shoulds, 169, 173
             with self, 340                            Simonton, Dean Keith, 80
          repetition, 122–126, 128, 218, 226           simulation trading, 112, 124–126, 228,
          research, 286–290, 292                            231, 259
          resilience, 86–88, 90, 267, 270,             slumps, 61, 113, 232, 267
                276                                    social learning, 201–204
          responsibility, 266, 291                     Spencer, Steve, 295
          review, 276                                  startup capital, 227–236
          risk, 47, 50, 53, 61–63, 74, 91–92, 94,      state, 116–117, 200, 211–214
                100, 120, 125, 133, 152, 155, 157,        incompatible, 211–214
                165, 168, 183, 200, 202, 210, 222,     stimulus-response, 196, 217
                229–231, 233, 240, 248–250,            Stock Tickr, 101, 149, 282–283
                252–253, 256, 258, 270, 272, 290       stop loss, 27–28, 35, 48, 62, 93, 100,
             adjusted returns, 210                          114, 118, 129, 140, 157, 223, 225,
             allocation, 290                                239, 251–252, 258. See also risk
             aversion, 62, 92, 94, 165, 183, 200,      strengths, 8–9, 31, 103, 105, 112, 340
                272                                    stress, 33–65, 95, 127, 138, 213, 218,
             excessive, 74, 125, 133                        220, 230. See also coping
             increasing, 53                               distress and, 34–37, 40, 62, 138, 213,
             management, 62, 91–92, 94, 152, 168,           220
                202, 240                                  inoculation, 127
             measuring, 248–250                           perception and, 41–42
             reducing, 50, 155
             reward and, 63, 100, 157, 233,            tenacity, 291
                248–250, 252–253, 258                  tension, 212
             rules and, 47, 120                        The Essentials of Trading blog, 290
             tolerance, 62–63                          The Kirk Report blog, 279
          roles, 23–25                                 thought stopping, 176–179
          rules, 46–48, 62, 118–120, 223               Tick Data, 313
                                                       Trade Ideas, 150
          SMB Capital, 295                             trade2win.com, 150
          SMB Training blog, 295                       trade management, 257–259
          schemas, 164–166, 170–177, 191               TradeStation, 150, 288, 311
          self awareness, 272                          tradethemarkets.com, 149
          self confidence, 25–28                       Trader DNA, 101, 300
          self efficacy, 6, 25–26, 125                 TraderFeed blog, xiii, 341, 343
          self esteem, 89                              Trader Mike blog, 271, 275
          self mastery, 101                            trading,
          self monitoring, 99–103, 139                    affirmations, 274
          self talk, 17, 115, 155, 171, 173, 175,         automated, 284
                179–188                                   business, 60, 227–260
          self understanding, 284–286                     concepts, 277–278
          Seneadza, Michael, 271, 273–275                 edge, 248–250, 266, 276, 288–289,
          Senters, Hubert, 149                               292, 301–302, 307–337
          Sentimentrader.com, 280                         environment, 11–14, 123–126,
          serenity, 83–86                                    271–272, 299–300
          Shannon, Brian, 275–277                         historical patterns, 307–336

P1: JYS
ind     JWBT039-Steenbarger        December 24, 2008      14:6     Printer: Yet to come




          Index                                                                            349

             journal, 10–11, 19, 39, 43–45,            Valfer, Reid, 295
                100–103, 116, 154, 160–161, 171,       variables, independent and dependent,
                200, 205–206, 268–270, 273,                 320–323, 326
                278–279, 281–282, 286, 292–293,        variability of returns, 210, 239–240,
                298, 300                                    249–250
             metrics, 237–243, 261, 304                video recording, 126, 141, 297
             niche, 58–61, 81                          virtual trading groups, 148
             partner, 277                              visualization, 5–6, 47, 88, 108, 111, 184,
             plans, 35, 53, 221                             216, 219–222, 224–226, 276–278,
             records, 279–282                               292, 317–320
             size, see position size                      of data, 317–320
             statistics, 296, 300. See also trading    VIX, 242, 332
                metrics                                volatility, 61–64, 210, 232–233, 235,
             target, 251–252                                239, 242, 250, 286
             themes, 133–135, 239, 254–257
             volume, 64, 216, 271                      well being, 67–98. See also happiness
          Trading RM, 295                              working through, 158
          Trading Success blog, 290                    worry, 163, 223–226
          transference, 153–155
          trauma, 125, 220
          triggers, 21, 200, 211, 213, 218, 220, 222   Yang, Rennie, 300–303, 310, 317
          trust, 93–94
          Twitter, 256                                 Zone, 73–77, 80, 222


